The Project Gutenberg eBook of The room in the tower, and other stories
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The room in the tower, and other stories

Author: E. F. Benson

Release date: December 15, 2023 [eBook #72421]
                Most recently updated: March 3, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: London: Mills & Boon, 1912

Credits: Chuck Greif, Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROOM IN THE TOWER, AND OTHER STORIES ***





                         THE ROOM IN THE TOWER

                           AND OTHER STORIES


THE MORNING POST says: “Messrs Mills & Boon seem to have acquired a
monopoly in clever first novels.” THE PALL MALL GAZETTE says: “We have
come to expect good work from the publishers of ‘In Different Keys’
(Mills & Boon).” THE GLOBE says: “One has almost come to regard Messrs
Mills & Boon as the publishers of the unexpected. Alike in fiction and
in more serious works, they introduce us to writers of exceptional
ability, and to subjects of uncommon interest.” THE NEW YORK HERALD
says: “They have long ago acquired the reputation for the production of
original books.”


                       Mills & Boon’s New Novels

                         _Crown 8vo, 6s. each_

                THE LURE. E. S. STEVENS.
                THE DAUGHTER OF BRAHMA. I. A. R. WYLIE.
                THE ROOM IN THE TOWER. E. F. BENSON.
                A BACHELOR’S COMEDY. J. E. BUCKROSE.
                THE PALACE OF LOGS. ROBERT BARR.
                WHEN GOD LAUGHS. JACK LONDON.
                ASHES OF INCENSE. By the AUTHOR OF “MASTERING FLAME.”
                HIS FIRST OFFENCE. J. STORER CLOUSTON.
                THE PRELUDE TO ADVENTURE. HUGH WALPOLE.
                THE BATTLE. CLAUDE FARRERE.
                STORIES WITHOUT TEARS. BARRY PAIN.
                THE FRONTIER. MAURICE LEBLANC.
                THE MARK. Mrs PHILIP CHAMPION DE CRESPIGNY.
                THE GIRL WITH THE BLUE EYES. Lady TROUBRIDGE.
                SONS OF STATE. WINIFRED GRAHAM.
                ENTER BRIDGET. THOMAS COBB.
                THE THORNBUSH NEAR THE DOOR. SOPHIE COLE.
                MEN AND DREAMS. MARY E. MANN.
                THE WRITTEN LAW. FRANCES G. KNOWLES-FOSTER.
                RUTH OF THE ROWLDRICH. Mrs STANLEY WRENCH.
                THE PRINCE. T. METCALFE.
                THE SILVER MEDALLION. PERCY J. BREBNER.
                THE PRINCE AND BETTY. P. G. WODEHOUSE.
                ALIENS NEAR OF KIN. N. VERNON.




                                  THE

                           ROOM IN THE TOWER

                           AND OTHER STORIES


                                  BY

                             E. F. BENSON

                               AUTHOR OF
                    “THE ANGEL OF PAIN,” “SHEAVES”


                            SECOND EDITION


                         MILLS & BOON, LIMITED
                           49 RUPERT STREET
                               LONDON W.

                           _Published 1912_

  _Copyright in the United States of America, 1912, by E. F. Benson_




PREFACE


These stories have been written in the hopes of giving some pleasant
qualms to their reader, so that, if by chance, anyone may be occupying
in their perusal a leisure half-hour before he goes to bed when the
night and the house are still, he may perhaps cast an occasional glance
into the corners and dark places of the room where he sits, to make sure
that nothing unusual lurks in the shadow. For this is the avowed object
of ghost-stories and such tales as deal with the dim unseen forces which
occasionally and perturbingly make themselves manifest. The author
therefore fervently wishes his readers a few uncomfortable moments.

Some of those tales have appeared before in various magazines; the
remainder are new. One, the story of “The Man who went too Far,” is the
germ of what subsequently developed into a book called “The Angel of
Pain.”

                                                          E. F. BENSON.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

THE ROOM IN THE TOWER                                                  1

THE DUST-CLOUD                                                        22

GAVON’S EVE                                                           44

THE CONFESSION OF CHARLES LINKWORTH                                   62

AT ABDUL ALI’S GRAVE                                                  87

THE SHOOTINGS OF ACHNALEISH                                          107

HOW FEAR DEPARTED FROM THE LONG GALLERY                              131

CATERPILLARS                                                         155

THE CAT                                                              169

THE BUS-CONDUCTOR                                                    192

THE MAN WHO WENT TOO FAR                                             206

BETWEEN THE LIGHTS                                                   241

OUTSIDE THE DOOR                                                     260

THE TERROR BY NIGHT                                                  273

THE OTHER BED                                                        285

THE THING IN THE HALL                                                302

THE HOUSE WITH THE BRICK-KILN                                        321




THE ROOM IN THE TOWER


It is probable that everybody who is at all a constant dreamer has had
at least one experience of an event or a sequence of circumstances which
have come to his mind in sleep being subsequently realised in the
material world. But, in my opinion, so far from this being a strange
thing, it would be far odder if this fulfilment did not occasionally
happen, since our dreams are, as a rule, concerned with people whom we
know and places with which we are familiar, such as might very naturally
occur in the awake and day-lit world. True, these dreams are often
broken into by some absurd and fantastic incident, which puts them out
of court in regard to their subsequent fulfilment, but on the mere
calculation of chances, it does not appear in the least unlikely that a
dream imagined by anyone who dreams constantly should occasionally come
true. Not long ago, for instance, I experienced such a fulfilment of a
dream which seems to me in no way remarkable and to have no kind of
psychical significance. The manner of it was as follows.

A certain friend of mine, living abroad, is amiable enough to write to
me about once in a fortnight. Thus, when fourteen days or thereabouts
have elapsed since I last heard from him, my mind, probably, either
consciously or subconsciously, is expectant of a letter from him. One
night last week I dreamed that as I was going upstairs to dress for
dinner I heard, as I often heard, the sound of the postman’s knock on my
front door, and diverted my direction downstairs instead. There, among
other correspondence, was a letter from him. Thereafter the fantastic
entered, for on opening it I found inside the ace of diamonds, and
scribbled across it in his well-known handwriting, “I am sending you
this for safe custody, as you know it is running an unreasonable risk to
keep aces in Italy.” The next evening I was just preparing to go
upstairs to dress when I heard the postman’s knock, and did precisely as
I had done in my dream. There, among other letters, was one from my
friend. Only it did not contain the ace of diamonds. Had it done so, I
should have attached more weight to the matter, which, as it stands,
seems to me a perfectly ordinary coincidence. No doubt I consciously or
subconsciously expected a letter from him, and this suggested to me my
dream. Similarly, the fact that my friend had not written to me for a
fortnight suggested to him that he should do so. But occasionally it is
not so easy to find such an explanation, and for the following story I
can find no explanation at all. It came out of the dark, and into the
dark it has gone again.

All my life I have been a habitual dreamer: the nights are few, that is
to say, when I do not find on awaking in the morning that some mental
experience has been mine, and sometimes, all night long, apparently, a
series of the most dazzling adventures befall me. Almost without
exception these adventures are pleasant, though often merely trivial. It
is of an exception that I am going to speak.

It was when I was about sixteen that a certain dream first came to me,
and this is how it befell. It opened with my being set down at the door
of a big red-brick house, where, I understood, I was going to stay. The
servant who opened the door told me that tea was going on in the garden,
and led me through a low dark-panelled hall, with a large open
fireplace, on to a cheerful green lawn set round with flower beds. There
were grouped about the tea-table a small party of people, but they were
all strangers to me except one, who was a school-fellow called Jack
Stone, clearly the son of the house, and he introduced me to his mother
and father and a couple of sisters. I was, I remember, somewhat
astonished to find myself here, for the boy in question was scarcely
known to me, and I rather disliked what I knew of him: moreover, he had
left school nearly a year before. The afternoon was very hot, and an
intolerable oppression reigned. On the far side of the lawn ran a
red-brick wall, with an iron gate in its centre, outside which stood a
walnut tree. We sat in the shadow of the house opposite a row of long
windows, inside which I could see a table with cloth laid, glimmering
with glass and silver. This garden front of the house was very long, and
at one end of it stood a tower of three stories, which looked to me much
older than the rest of the building.

Before long, Mrs Stone, who, like the rest of the party, had sat in
absolute silence, said to me, “Jack will show you your room: I have
given you the room in the tower.”

Quite inexplicably my heart sank at her words. I felt as if I had known
that I should have the room in the tower, and that it contained
something dreadful and significant. Jack instantly got up, and I
understood that I had to follow him. In silence we passed through the
hall, and mounted a great oak staircase with many corners, and arrived
at a small landing with two doors set in it. He pushed one of these open
for me to enter, and without coming in himself, closed it behind me.
Then I knew that my conjecture had been right: there was something awful
in the room, and with the terror of nightmare growing swiftly and
enveloping me, I awoke in a spasm of terror.

Now that dream or variations on it occurred to me intermittently for
fifteen years. Most often it came in exactly this form, the arrival, the
tea laid out on the lawn, the deadly silence succeeded by that one
deadly sentence, the mounting with Jack Stone up to the room in the
tower where horror dwelt, and it always came to a close in the nightmare
of terror at that which was in the room, though I never saw what it was.
At other times I experienced variations on this same theme.
Occasionally, for instance, we would be sitting at dinner in the
dining-room, into the windows of which I had looked on the first night
when the dream of this house visited me, but wherever we were, there was
the same silence, the same sense of dreadful oppression and foreboding.
And the silence I knew would always be broken by Mrs Stone saying to me,
“Jack will show you your room: I have given you the room in the tower.”
Upon which (this was invariable) I had to follow him up the oak
staircase with many corners, and enter the place that I dreaded more and
more each time that I visited it in sleep. Or, again, I would find
myself playing cards still in silence in a drawing-room lit with immense
chandeliers, that gave a blinding illumination. What the game was I have
no idea; what I remember, with a sense of miserable anticipation, was
that soon Mrs Stone would get up and say to me, “Jack will show you your
room: I have given you the room in the tower.” This drawing-room where
we played cards was next to the dining-room, and, as I have said, was
always brilliantly illuminated, whereas the rest of the house was full
of dusk and shadows. And yet, how often, in spite of those bouquets of
lights, have I not pored over the cards that were dealed me, scarcely
able for some reason to see them. Their designs, too, were strange:
there were no red suits, but all were black, and among them there were
certain cards which were black all over. I hated and dreaded those.

As this dream continued to recur, I got to know the greater part of the
house. There was a smoking-room beyond the drawing-room, at the end of a
passage with a green baize door. It was always very dark there, and as
often as I went there I passed somebody whom I could not see in the
doorway coming out. Curious developments, too, took place in the
characters that peopled the dream as might happen to living persons. Mrs
Stone, for instance, who, when I first saw her, had been black haired,
became grey, and instead of rising briskly, as she had done at first
when she said, “Jack will show you your room: I have given you the room
in the tower,” got up very feebly, as if the strength was leaving her
limbs. Jack also grew up, and became a rather ill-looking young man,
with a brown moustache, while one of the sisters ceased to appear, and I
understood she was married.

Then it so happened that I was not visited by this dream for six months
or more, and I began to hope, in such inexplicable dread did I hold it,
that it had passed away for good. But one night after this interval I
again found myself being shown out on to the lawn for tea, and Mrs Stone
was not there, while the others were all dressed in black. At once I
guessed the reason, and my heart leaped at the thought that perhaps this
time I should not have to sleep in the room in the tower, and though we
usually all sat in silence, on this occasion the sense of relief made me
talk and laugh as I had never yet done. But even then matters were not
altogether comfortable, for no one else spoke, but they all looked
secretly at each other. And soon the foolish stream of my talk ran dry,
and gradually an apprehension worse than anything I had previously known
gained on me as the light slowly faded.

Suddenly a voice which I knew well broke the stillness, the voice of Mrs
Stone, saying, “Jack will show you your room: I have given you the room
in the tower.” It seemed to come from near the gate in the red-brick
wall that bounded the lawn, and looking up, I saw that the grass outside
was sown thick with gravestones. A curious greyish light shone from
them, and I could read the lettering on the grave nearest me, and it
was, “In evil memory of Julia Stone.” And as usual Jack got up, and
again I followed him through the hall and up the staircase with many
corners. On this occasion it was darker than usual, and when I passed
into the room in the tower I could only just see the furniture, the
position of which was already familiar to me. Also there was a dreadful
odour of decay in the room, and I woke screaming.

The dream, with such variations and developments as I have mentioned,
went on at intervals for fifteen years. Sometimes I would dream it two
or three nights in succession; once, as I have said, there was an
intermission of six months, but taking a reasonable average, I should
say that I dreamed it quite as often as once in a month. It had, as is
plain, something of nightmare about it, since it always ended in the
same appalling terror, which so far from getting less, seemed to me to
gather fresh fear every time that I experienced it. There was, too, a
strange and dreadful consistency about it. The characters in it, as I
have mentioned, got regularly older, death and marriage visited this
silent family, and I never in the dream, after Mrs Stone had died, set
eyes on her again. But it was always her voice that told me that the
room in the tower was prepared for me, and whether we had tea out on the
lawn, or the scene was laid in one of the rooms overlooking it, I could
always see her gravestone standing just outside the iron gate. It was
the same, too, with the married daughter; usually she was not present,
but once or twice she returned again, in company with a man, whom I took
to be her husband. He, too, like the rest of them, was always silent.
But, owing to the constant repetition of the dream, I had ceased to
attach, in my waking hours, any significance to it. I never met Jack
Stone again during all those years, nor did I ever see a house that
resembled this dark house of my dream. And then something happened.

I had been in London in this year, up till the end of July, and during
the first week in August went down to stay with a friend in a house he
had taken for the summer months, in the Ashdown Forest district of
Sussex. I left London early, for John Clinton was to meet me at Forest
Row Station, and we were going to spend the day golfing, and go to his
house in the evening. He had his motor with him, and we set off, about
five of the afternoon, after a thoroughly delightful day, for the drive,
the distance being some ten miles. As it was still so early we did not
have tea at the club house, but waited till we should get home. As we
drove, the weather, which up till then had been, though hot, deliciously
fresh, seemed to me to alter in quality, and become very stagnant and
oppressive, and I felt that indefinable sense of ominous apprehension
that I am accustomed to before thunder. John, however, did not share my
views, attributing my loss of lightness to the fact that I had lost both
my matches. Events proved, however, that I was right, though I do not
think that the thunderstorm that broke that night was the sole cause of
my depression.

Our way lay through deep high-banked lanes, and before we had gone very
far I fell asleep, and was only awakened by the stopping of the motor.
And with a sudden thrill, partly of fear but chiefly of curiosity, I
found myself standing in the doorway of my house of dream. We went, I
half wondering whether or not I was dreaming still, through a low
oak-panelled hall, and out on to the lawn, where tea was laid in the
shadow of the house. It was set in flower beds, a red-brick wall, with a
gate in it, bounded one side, and out beyond that was a space of rough
grass with a walnut tree. The façade of the house was very long, and at
one end stood a three-storied tower, markedly older than the rest.

Here for the moment all resemblance to the repeated dream ceased. There
was no silent and somehow terrible family, but a large assembly of
exceedingly cheerful persons, all of whom were known to me. And in spite
of the horror with which the dream itself had always filled me, I felt
nothing of it now that the scene of it was thus reproduced before me.
But I felt the intensest curiosity as to what was going to happen.

Tea pursued its cheerful course, and before long Mrs Clinton got up. And
at that moment I think I knew what she was going to say. She spoke to
me, and what she said was:

“Jack will show you your room: I have given you the room in the tower.”

At that, for half a second, the horror of the dream took hold of me
again. But it quickly passed, and again I felt nothing more than the
most intense curiosity. It was not very long before it was amply
satisfied.

John turned to me.

“Right up at the top of the house,” he said, “but I think you’ll be
comfortable. We’re absolutely full up. Would you like to go and see it
now? By Jove, I believe that you are right, and that we are going to
have a thunderstorm. How dark it has become.”

I got up and followed him. We passed through the hall, and up the
perfectly familiar staircase. Then he opened the door, and I went in.
And at that moment sheer unreasoning terror again possessed me. I did
not know for certain what I feared: I simply feared. Then like a sudden
recollection, when one remembers a name which has long escaped the
memory, I knew what I feared. I feared Mrs Stone, whose grave with the
sinister inscription, “In evil memory,” I had so often seen in my dream,
just beyond the lawn which lay below my window. And then once more the
fear passed so completely that I wondered what there was to fear, and I
found myself, sober and quiet and sane, in the room in the tower, the
name of which I had so often heard in my dream, and the scene of which
was so familiar.

I looked round it with a certain sense of proprietorship, and found that
nothing had been changed from the dreaming nights in which I knew it so
well. Just to the left of the door was the bed, lengthways along the
wall, with the head of it in the angle. In a line with it was the
fireplace and a small bookcase; opposite the door the outer wall was
pierced by two lattice-paned windows, between which stood the
dressing-table, while ranged along the fourth wall was the washing-stand
and a big cupboard. My luggage had already been unpacked, for the
furniture of dressing and undressing lay orderly on the wash-stand and
toilet-table, while my dinner clothes were spread out on the coverlet of
the bed. And then, with a sudden start of unexplained dismay, I saw that
there were two rather conspicuous objects which I had not seen before in
my dreams: one a life-sized oil-painting of Mrs Stone, the other a
black-and-white sketch of Jack Stone, representing him as he had
appeared to me only a week before in the last of the series of these
repeated dreams, a rather secret and evil-looking man of about thirty.
His picture hung between the windows, looking straight across the room
to the other portrait, which hung at the side of the bed. At that I
looked next, and as I looked I felt once more the horror of nightmare
seize me.

It represented Mrs Stone as I had seen her last in my dreams: old and
withered and white haired. But in spite of the evident feebleness of
body, a dreadful exuberance and vitality shone through the envelope of
flesh, an exuberance wholly malign, a vitality that foamed and frothed
with unimaginable evil. Evil beamed from the narrow, leering eyes; it
laughed in the demon-like mouth. The whole face was instinct with some
secret and appalling mirth; the hands, clasped together on the knee,
seemed shaking with suppressed and nameless glee. Then I saw also that
it was signed in the left-hand bottom corner, and wondering who the
artist could be, I looked more closely, and read the inscription, “Julia
Stone by Julia Stone.”

There came a tap at the door, and John Clinton entered.

“Got everything you want?” he asked.

“Rather more than I want,” said I, pointing to the picture.

He laughed.

“Hard-featured old lady,” he said. “By herself, too, I remember. Anyhow
she can’t have flattered herself much.”

“But don’t you see?” said I. “It’s scarcely a human face at all. It’s
the face of some witch, of some devil.”

He looked at it more closely.

“Yes; it isn’t very pleasant,” he said. “Scarcely a bedside manner, eh?
Yes; I can imagine getting the nightmare if I went to sleep with that
close by my bed. I’ll have it taken down if you like.”

“I really wish you would,” I said.

He rang the bell, and with the help of a servant we detached the
picture and carried it out on to the landing, and put it with its face
to the wall.

“By Jove, the old lady is a weight,” said John, mopping his forehead. “I
wonder if she had something on her mind.”

The extraordinary weight of the picture had struck me too. I was about
to reply, when I caught sight of my own hand. There was blood on it, in
considerable quantities, covering the whole palm.

“I’ve cut myself somehow,” said I.

John gave a little startled exclamation.

“Why, I have too,” he said.

Simultaneously the footman took out his handkerchief and wiped his hand
with it. I saw that there was blood also on his handkerchief.

John and I went back into the tower room and washed the blood off; but
neither on his hand nor on mine was there the slightest trace of a
scratch or cut. It seemed to me that, having ascertained this, we both,
by a sort of tacit consent, did not allude to it again. Something in my
case had dimly occurred to me that I did not wish to think about. It was
but a conjecture, but I fancied that I knew the same thing had occurred
to him.

The heat and oppression of the air, for the storm we had expected was
still undischarged, increased very much after dinner, and for some time
most of the party, among whom were John Clinton and myself, sat outside
on the path bounding the lawn, where we had had tea. The night was
absolutely dark, and no twinkle of star or moon ray could penetrate the
pall of cloud that overset the sky. By degrees our assembly thinned, the
women went up to bed, men dispersed to the smoking or billiard room, and
by eleven o’clock my host and I were the only two left. All the evening
I thought that he had something on his mind, and as soon as we were
alone he spoke.

“The man who helped us with the picture had blood on his hand, too, did
you notice?” he said. “I asked him just now if he had cut himself, and
he said he supposed he had, but that he could find no mark of it. Now
where did that blood come from?”

By dint of telling myself that I was not going to think about it, I had
succeeded in not doing so, and I did not want, especially just at
bedtime, to be reminded of it.

“I don’t know,” said I, “and I don’t really care so long as the picture
of Mrs Julia Stone is not by my bed.”

He got up.

“But it’s odd,” he said. “Ha! Now you’ll see another odd thing.”

A dog of his, an Irish terrier by breed, had come out of the house as we
talked. The door behind us into the hall was open, and a bright oblong
of light shone across the lawn to the iron gate which led on to the
rough grass outside, where the walnut tree stood. I saw that the dog
had all his hackles up, bristling with rage and fright; his lips were
curled back from his teeth, as if he was ready to spring at something,
and he was growling to himself. He took not the slightest notice of his
master or me, but stiffly and tensely walked across the grass to the
iron gate. There he stood for a moment, looking through the bars and
still growling. Then of a sudden his courage seemed to desert him: he
gave one long howl, and scuttled back to the house with a curious
crouching sort of movement.

“He does that half-a-dozen times a day,” said John. “He sees something
which he both hates and fears.”

I walked to the gate and looked over it. Something was moving on the
grass outside, and soon a sound which I could not instantly identify
came to my ears. Then I remembered what it was: it was the purring of a
cat. I lit a match, and saw the purrer, a big blue Persian, walking
round and round in a little circle just outside the gate, stepping high
and ecstatically, with tail carried aloft like a banner. Its eyes were
bright and shining, and every now and then it put its head down and
sniffed at the grass.

I laughed.

“The end of that mystery, I am afraid,” I said. “Here’s a large cat
having Walpurgis night all alone.”

“Yes, that’s Darius,” said John. “He spends half the day and all night
there. But that’s not the end of the dog mystery, for Toby and he are
the best of friends, but the beginning of the cat mystery. What’s the
cat doing there? And why is Darius pleased, while Toby is
terror-stricken?”

At that moment I remembered the rather horrible detail of my dreams when
I saw through the gate, just where the cat was now, the white tombstone
with the sinister inscription. But before I could answer the rain began,
as suddenly and heavily as if a tap had been turned on, and
simultaneously the big cat squeezed through the bars of the gate, and
came leaping across the lawn to the house for shelter. Then it sat in
the doorway, looking out eagerly into the dark. It spat and struck at
John with its paw, as he pushed it in, in order to close the door.

Somehow, with the portrait of Julia Stone in the passage outside, the
room in the tower had absolutely no alarm for me, and as I went to bed,
feeling very sleepy and heavy, I had nothing more than interest for the
curious incident about our bleeding hands, and the conduct of the cat
and dog. The last thing I looked at before I put out my light was the
square empty space by my bed where the portrait had been. Here the paper
was of its original full tint of dark red: over the rest of the walls it
had faded. Then I blew out my candle and instantly fell asleep.

My awaking was equally instantaneous, and I sat bolt upright in bed
under the impression that some bright light had been flashed in my face,
though it was now absolutely pitch dark. I knew exactly where I was, in
the room which I had dreaded in dreams, but no horror that I ever felt
when asleep approached the fear that now invaded and froze my brain.
Immediately after a peal of thunder crackled just above the house, but
the probability that it was only a flash of lightning which awoke me
gave no reassurance to my galloping heart. Something I knew was in the
room with me, and instinctively I put out my right hand, which was
nearest the wall, to keep it away. And my hand touched the edge of a
picture-frame hanging close to me.

I sprang out of bed, upsetting the small table that stood by it, and I
heard my watch, candle, and matches clatter on to the floor. But for the
moment there was no need of light, for a blinding flash leaped out of
the clouds, and showed me that by my bed again hung the picture of Mrs
Stone. And instantly the room went into blackness again. But in that
flash I saw another thing also, namely a figure that leaned over the end
of my bed, watching me. It was dressed in some close-clinging white
garment, spotted and stained with mould, and the face was that of the
portrait.

Overhead the thunder cracked and roared, and when it ceased and the
deathly stillness succeeded, I heard the rustle of movement coming
nearer me, and, more horrible yet, perceived an odour of corruption and
decay. And then a hand was laid on the side of my neck, and close beside
my ear I heard quick-taken, eager breathing. Yet I knew that this thing,
though it could be perceived by touch, by smell, by eye and by ear, was
still not of this earth, but something that had passed out of the body
and had power to make itself manifest. Then a voice, already familiar to
me, spoke.

“I knew you would come to the room in the tower,” it said. “I have been
long waiting for you. At last you have come. To-night I shall feast;
before long we will feast together.”

And the quick breathing came closer to me; I could feel it on my neck.

At that the terror, which I think had paralyzed me for the moment, gave
way to the wild instinct of self-preservation. I hit wildly with both
arms, kicking out at the same moment, and heard a little animal-squeal,
and something soft dropped with a thud beside me. I took a couple of
steps forward, nearly tripping up over whatever it was that lay there,
and by the merest good-luck found the handle of the door. In another
second I ran out on the landing, and had banged the door behind me.
Almost at the same moment I heard a door open somewhere below, and John
Clinton, candle in hand, came running upstairs.

“What is it?” he said. “I sleep just below you, and heard a noise as
if--Good heavens, there’s blood on your shoulder.”

I stood there, so he told me afterwards, swaying from side to side,
white as a sheet, with the mark on my shoulder as if a hand covered with
blood had been laid there.

“It’s in there,” I said, pointing. “She, you know. The portrait is in
there, too, hanging up on the place we took it from.”

At that he laughed.

“My dear fellow, this is mere nightmare,” he said.

He pushed by me, and opened the door, I standing there simply inert with
terror, unable to stop him, unable to move.

“Phew! What an awful smell,” he said.

Then there was silence; he had passed out of my sight behind the open
door. Next moment he came out again, as white as myself, and instantly
shut it.

“Yes, the portrait’s there,” he said, “and on the floor is a thing--a
thing spotted with earth, like what they bury people in. Come away,
quick, come away.”

How I got downstairs I hardly know. An awful shuddering and nausea of
the spirit rather than of the flesh had seized me, and more than once he
had to place my feet upon the steps, while every now and then he cast
glances of terror and apprehension up the stairs. But in time we came
to his dressing-room on the floor below, and there I told him what I
have here described.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sequel can be made short; indeed, some of my readers have perhaps
already guessed what it was, if they remember that inexplicable affair
of the churchyard at West Fawley, some eight years ago, where an attempt
was made three times to bury the body of a certain woman who had
committed suicide. On each occasion the coffin was found in the course
of a few days again protruding from the ground. After the third attempt,
in order that the thing should not be talked about, the body was buried
elsewhere in unconsecrated ground. Where it was buried was just outside
the iron gate of the garden belonging to the house where this woman had
lived. She had committed suicide in a room at the top of the tower in
that house. Her name was Julia Stone.

Subsequently the body was again secretly dug up, and the coffin was
found to be full of blood.




THE DUST-CLOUD


The big French windows were open on to the lawn, and, dinner being over,
two or three of the party who were staying for the week at the end of
August with the Combe-Martins had strolled out on to the terrace to look
at the sea, over which the moon, large and low, was just rising and
tracing a path of pale gold from horizon to shore, while others, less
lunar of inclination, had gone in search of bridge or billiards. Coffee
had come round immediately after dessert, and the end of dinner,
according to the delectable custom of the house, was as informal as the
end of breakfast. Every one, that is to say, remained or went away,
smoked, drank port or abstained, according to his personal tastes. Thus,
on this particular evening it so happened that Harry Combe-Martin and I
were very soon left alone in the dining-room, because we were talking
unmitigated motor “shop,” and the rest of the party (small wonder) were
bored with it, and had left us. The shop was home-shop, so to speak, for
it was almost entirely concerned with the manifold perfections of the
new six-cylinder Napier which my host in a moment of extravagance, which
he did not in the least regret, had just purchased; in which, too, he
proposed to take me over to lunch at a friend’s house near Hunstanton on
the following day. He observed with legitimate pride that an early start
would not be necessary as the distance was only eighty miles and there
were no police traps.

“Queer things these big motors are,” he said, relapsing into
generalities as we rose to go. “Often I can scarcely believe that my new
car is merely a machine. It seems to me to possess an independent life
of its own. It is really much more like a thoroughbred with a
wonderfully fine mouth.”

“And the moods of a thoroughbred?” I asked.

“No; it’s got an excellent temper, I’m glad to say. It doesn’t mind
being checked, or even stopped, when it’s going its best. Some of these
big cars can’t stand that. They get sulky--I assure you it is literally
true--if they are checked too often.”

He paused on his way to ring the bell. “Guy Elphinstone’s car, for
instance,” he said: “it was a bad-tempered brute, a violent, vicious
beast of a car.”

“What make?” I asked.

“Twenty-five horse-power Amédée. They are a fretful strain of car; too
thin, not enough bone--and bone is very good for the nerves. The brute
liked running over a chicken or a rabbit, though perhaps it was less the
car’s ill-temper than Guy’s, poor chap. Well, he paid for it--he paid
to the uttermost farthing. Did you know him?”

“No; but surely I have heard the name. Ah, yes, he ran over a child, did
he not?”

“Yes,” said Harry, “and then smashed up against his own park gates.”

“Killed, wasn’t he?”

“Oh yes, killed instantly, and the car just a heap of splinters. There’s
an odd story about it, I’m told, in the village: rather in your line.”

“Ghosts?” I asked.

“Yes, the ghost of his motor-car. Seems almost too up-to-date, doesn’t
it?”

“And what’s the story?” I demanded.

“Why, just this. His place was outside the village of Bircham, ten miles
out from Norwich; and there’s a long straight bit of road there--that’s
where he ran over the child--and a couple of hundred yards farther on, a
rather awkward turn into the park gates. Well, a month or two ago, soon
after the accident, one old gaffer in the village swore he had seen a
motor there coming full tilt along the road, but without a sound, and it
disappeared at the lodge gates of the park, which were shut. Soon after
another said he had heard a motor whirl by him at the same place,
followed by a hideous scream, but he saw nothing.”

“The scream is rather horrible,” said I.

“Ah, I see what you mean! I only thought of his syren. Guy had a syren
on his exhaust, same as I have. His had a dreadful frightened sort of
wail, and always made me feel creepy.”

“And is that all the story?” I asked: “that one old man thought he saw a
noiseless motor, and another thought he heard an invisible one?”

Harry flicked the ash off his cigarette into the grate. “Oh dear no!” he
said. “Half a dozen of them have seen something or heard something. It
is quite a heavily authenticated yarn.”

“Yes, and talked over and edited in the public-house,” I said.

“Well, not a man of them will go there after dark. Also the lodge-keeper
gave notice a week or two after the accident. He said he was always
hearing a motor stop and hoot outside the lodge, and he was kept running
out at all hours of the night to see what it was.”

“And what was it?”

“It wasn’t anything. Simply nothing there. He thought it rather uncanny,
anyhow, and threw up a good post. Besides, his wife was always hearing a
child scream, and while her man toddled out to the gate she would go and
see whether the kids were all right. And the kids themselves----”

“Ah, what of them?” I asked.

“They kept coming to their mother, asking who the little girl was who
walked up and down the road and would not speak to them or play with
them.”

“It’s a many-sided story,” I said. “All the witnesses seem to have heard
and seen different things.”

“Yes, that is just what to my mind makes the yarn so good,” he said.
“Personally I don’t take much stock in spooks at all. But given that
there are such things as spooks, and given that the death of the child
and the death of Guy have caused spooks to play about there, it seems to
me a very good point that different people should be aware of different
phenomena. One hears the car, another sees it, one hears the child
scream, another sees the child. How does that strike you?”

This, I am bound to say, was a new view to me, and the more I thought of
it the more reasonable it appeared. For the vast majority of mankind
have all those occult senses by which is perceived the spiritual world
(which, I hold, is thick and populous around us), sealed up, as it were;
in other words, the majority of mankind never hear or see a ghost at
all. Is it not, then, very probable that of the remainder--those, in
fact, to whom occult experiences have happened or can happen--few should
have every sense unsealed, but that some should have the unsealed ear,
others the unsealed eye--that some should be clairaudient, others
clairvoyant?

“Yes, it strikes me as reasonable,” I said. “Can’t you take me over
there?”

“Certainly! If you will stop till Friday I’ll take you over on
Thursday. The others all go that day, so that we can get there after
dark.”

I shook my head. “I can’t stop till Friday, I’m afraid,” I said. “I must
leave on Thursday. But how about to-morrow? Can’t we take it on the way
to or from Hunstanton?”

“No; it’s thirty miles out of our way. Besides, to be at Bircham after
dark means that we shouldn’t get back here till midnight. And as host to
my guests----”

“Ah! things are only heard and seen after dark, are they?” I asked.
“That makes it so much less interesting. It is like a séance where all
lights are put out.”

“Well, the accident happened at night,” he said. “I don’t know the
rules, but that may have some bearing on it, I should think.”

I had one question more in the back of my mind, but I did not like to
ask it. At least, I wanted information on this subject without appearing
to ask for it.

“Neither do I know the rules of motors,” I said; “and I don’t understand
you when you say that Guy Elphinstone’s machine was an irritable,
cross-grained brute, that liked running over chickens and rabbits. But I
think you subsequently said that the irritability may have been the
irritability of its owner. Did he mind being checked?”

“It made him blind-mad if it happened often,” said Harry. “I shall never
forget a drive I had with him once: there were hay-carts and
perambulators every hundred yards. It was perfectly ghastly; it was like
being with a madman. And when we got inside his gate, his dog came
running out to meet him. He did not go an inch out of his course: it was
worse than that--he went for it, just grinding his teeth with rage. I
never drove with him again.”

He stopped a moment, guessing what might be in my mind. “I say, you
mustn’t think--you mustn’t think----” he began.

“No, of course not,” said I.

Harry Combe-Martin’s house stood close to the weather-eaten, sandy
cliffs of the Suffolk shore, which are being incessantly gnawed away by
the hunger of the insatiable sea. Fathoms deep below it, and now many
hundred yards out, lies what was once the second port in England; but
now of the ancient town of Dunwich, and of its seven great churches,
nothing remains but one, and that ruinous and already half destroyed by
the falling cliff and the encroachments of the sea. Foot by foot, it too
is disappearing, and of the graveyard which surrounded it more than half
is gone, so that from the face of the sandy cliff on which it stands
there stick out like straws in glass, as Dante says, the bones of those
who were once committed there to the kindly and stable earth.

Whether it was the remembrance of this rather grim spectacle as I had
seen it that afternoon, or whether Harry’s story had caused some
trouble in my brain, or whether it was merely that the keen bracing air
of this place, to one who had just come from the sleepy languor of the
Norfolk Broads, kept me sleepless, I do not know; but, anyhow, the
moment I put out my light that night and got into bed, I felt that all
the footlights and gas-jets in the internal theatre of my mind sprang
into flame, and that I was very vividly and alertly awake. It was in
vain that I counted a hundred forwards and a hundred backwards, that I
pictured to myself a flock of visionary sheep coming singly through a
gap in an imaginary hedge, and tried to number their monotonous and
uniform countenances, that I played noughts and crosses with myself,
that I marked out scores of double lawn-tennis courts,--for with each
repetition of these supposedly soporific exercises I only became more
intensely wakeful. It was not in remote hope of sleep that I continued
to repeat these weary performances long after their inefficacy was
proved to the hilt, but because I was strangely unwilling in this
timeless hour of the night to think about those protruding relics of
humanity; also I quite distinctly did not desire to think about that
subject with regard to which I had, a few hours ago, promised Harry that
I would not make it the subject of reflection. For these reasons I
continued during the black hours to practise these narcotic exercises of
the mind, knowing well that if I paused on the tedious treadmill my
thoughts, like some released spring, would fly back to rather gruesome
subjects. I kept my mind, in fact, talking loud to itself, so that it
should not hear what other voices were saying.

Then by degrees these absurd mental occupations became impossible; my
mind simply refused to occupy itself with them any longer; and next
moment I was thinking intently and eagerly, not about the bones
protruding from the gnawed section of sand-cliff, but about the subject
I had said I would not dwell upon. And like a flash it came upon me why
Harry had bidden me not think about it. Surely in order that I should
not come to the same conclusion as he had come to.

Now the whole question of “haunt”--haunted spots, haunted houses, and so
forth--has always seemed to me to be utterly unsolved, and to be neither
proved nor disproved to a satisfactory degree. From the earliest times,
certainly from the earliest known Egyptian records, there has been a
belief that the scene of a crime is often revisited, sometimes by the
spirit of him who has committed it--seeking rest, we must suppose, and
finding none; sometimes, and more inexplicably, by the spirit of his
victim, crying perhaps, like the blood of Abel, for vengeance. And
though the stories of these village gossips in the alehouse about
noiseless visions and invisible noises were all as yet unsifted and
unreliable, yet I could not help wondering if they (such as they were)
pointed to something authentic and to be classed under this head of
appearances. But more striking than the yarns of the gaffers seemed to
me the questions of the lodge-keeper’s children. How should children
have imagined the figure of a child that would not speak to them or play
with them? Perhaps it was a real child, a sulky child. Yes--perhaps. But
perhaps not. Then after this preliminary skirmish I found myself
settling down to the question that I had said I would not think about;
in other words, the possible origin of these phenomena interested me
more than the phenomena themselves. For what exactly had Guy
Elphinstone, that savage driver, done? Had or had not the death of the
child been entirely an accident, a thing (given he drove a motor at all)
outside his own control? Or had he, irritated beyond endurance at the
checks and delays of the day, not pulled up when it was just possible he
might have, but had run over the child as he would have run over a
rabbit or a hen, or even his own dog? And what, in any case, poor
wretched brute, must have been his thoughts in that terrible instant
that intervened between the child’s death and his own, when a moment
later he smashed into the closed gates of his own lodge? Was remorse
his--bitter, despairing contrition? That could hardly have been so; or
else surely, knowing only for certain that he had knocked a child down,
he would have stopped; he would have done his best, whatever that might
be, to repair the irreparable harm. But he had not stopped: he had gone
on, it seemed, at full speed, for on the collision the car had been
smashed into matchwood and steel shavings. Again, with double force, had
this dreadful thing been a complete accident, he would have stopped. So
then--most terrible question of all--had he, after making murder, rushed
on to what proved to be his own death, filled with some hellish glee at
what he had done? Indeed, as in the churchyard on the cliff, bones of
the buried stuck starkly out into the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pale tired light of earliest morning had turned the window-blinds
into glimmering squares before I slept; and when I woke, the servant who
called me was already rattling them briskly up on their rollers, and
letting the calm serenity of the August day stream into the room.
Through the open windows poured in sunlight and sea-wind, the scent of
flowers and the song of birds; and each and all were wonderfully
reassuring, banishing the hooded forms that had haunted the night, and I
thought of the disquietude of the dark hours as a traveller may think of
the billows and tempests of the ocean over which he has safely
journeyed, unable, now that they belong to the limbo of the past, to
recall his qualms and tossings with any vivid uneasiness. Not without a
feeling of relief, too, did I dwell on the knowledge that I was
definitely not going to visit this equivocal spot. Our drive to-day, as
Harry had said, would not take us within thirty miles of it, and
to-morrow I but went to the station and away. Though a thorough-paced
seeker after truth might, no doubt, have regretted that the laws of time
and space did not permit him to visit Bircham after the sinister dark
had fallen, and test whether for him there was visible or audible truth
in the tales of the village gossips, I was conscious of no such regret.
Bircham and its fables had given me a very bad night, and I was
perfectly aware that I did not in the least want to go near it, though
yesterday I had quite truthfully said I should like to do so. In this
brightness, too, of sun and sea-wind I felt none of the _malaise_ at my
waking moments which a sleepless night usually gives me; I felt
particularly well, particularly pleased to be alive, and also, as I have
said, particularly content not to be going to Bircham. I was quite
satisfied to leave my curiosity unsatisfied.

       *       *       *       *       *

The motor came round about eleven, and we started at once, Harry and Mrs
Morrison, a cousin of his, sitting behind in the big back seat, large
enough to hold a comfortable three, and I on the left of the driver, in
a sort of trance--I am not ashamed to confess it--of expectancy and
delight. For this was in the early days of motors, when there was still
the sense of romance and adventure round them. I did not want to drive,
any more than Harry wanted to; for driving, so I hold, is too absorbing;
it takes the attention in too firm a grip: the mania of the true
motorist is not consciously enjoyed. For the passion for motors is a
taste--I had almost said a gift--as distinct and as keenly individual as
the passion for music or mathematics. Those who use motors most (merely
as a means of getting rapidly from one place to another) are often
entirely without it, while those whom adverse circumstances (over which
they have no control) compel to use them least may have it to a supreme
degree. To those who have it, analysis of their passion is perhaps
superfluous; to those who have it not, explanation is almost
unintelligible. Pace, however, and the control of pace, and above all
the sensuous consciousness of pace, is at the root of it; and pleasure
in pace is common to most people, whether it be in the form of a
galloping horse, or the pace of the skate hissing over smooth ice, or
the pace of a free-wheel bicycle humming down-hill, or, more
impersonally, the pace of the smashed ball at lawn-tennis, the driven
ball at golf, or the low boundary hit at cricket. But the sensuous
consciousness of pace, as I have said, is needful: one might experience
it seated in front of the engine of an express train, though not in a
wadded, shut-windowed carriage, where the wind of movement is not felt.
Then add to this rapture of the rush through riven air the knowledge
that huge relentless force is controlled by a little lever, and
directed by a little wheel on which the hands of the driver seem to lie
so negligently. A great untamed devil has there his bridle, and he
answers to it, as Harry had said, like a horse with a fine mouth. He has
hunger and thirst, too, unslakeable, and greedily he laps of his soup of
petrol which turns to fire in his mouth: electricity, the force that
rends clouds asunder, and causes towers to totter, is the spoon with
which he feeds himself; and as he eats he races onward, and the road
opens like torn linen in front of him. Yet how obedient, how amenable is
he!--for with a touch on his snaffle his speed is redoubled, or melts
into thin air, so that before you know you have touched the rein he has
exchanged his swallow-flight for a mere saunter through the lanes. But
he ever loves to run; and knowing this, you will bid him lift up his
voice and tell those who are in his path that he is coming, so that he
will not need the touch that checks. Hoarse and jovial is his voice,
hooting to the wayfarer; and if his hooting be not heard he has a great
guttural falsetto scream that leaps from octave to octave, and echoes
from the hedges that are passing in blurred lines of hanging green. And,
as you go, the romantic isolation of divers in deep seas is yours;
masked and hooded companions may be near you also, in their
driving-dress for this plunge through the swift tides of air; but you,
like them, are alone and isolated, conscious only of the ripped riband
of road, the two great lantern-eyes of the wonderful monster that look
through drooped eyelids by day, but gleam with fire by night, the two
ear-laps of splash-boards, and the long lean bonnet in front which is
the skull and brain-case of that swift, untiring energy that feeds on
fire, and whirls its two tons of weight up hill and down dale, as if
some new law as everlasting as gravity, and like gravity making it go
ever swifter, was its sole control.

For the first hour the essence of these joys, any description of which
compared to the real thing is but as a stagnant pond compared to the
bright rushing of a mountain stream, was mine. A straight switchback
road lay in front of us, and the monster plunged silently down hill, and
said below his breath, “Ha-ha--ha-ha--ha-ha,” as, without diminution of
speed, he breasted the opposing slope. In my control were his great
vocal chords (for in those days hooter and syren were on the driver’s
left, and lay convenient, to the hand of him who occupied the box-seat),
and it rejoiced me to let him hoot to a pony-cart, three hundred yards
ahead, with a hand on his falsetto scream if his ordinary tones of
conversation were unheard or disregarded. Then came a road crossing ours
at right angles, and the dear monster seemed to say, “Yes, yes,--see how
obedient and careful I am. I stroll with my hands in my pockets.” Then
again a puppy from a farmhouse staggered warlike into the road, and the
monster said, “Poor little chap! get home to your mother, or I’ll talk
to you in earnest.” The poor little chap did not take the hint, so the
monster slackened speed and just said, “Whoof!” Then it chuckled to
itself as the puppy scuttled into the hedge, seriously alarmed; and next
moment our self-made wind screeched and whistled round us again.

Napoleon, I believe, said that the power of an army lay in its feet:
that is true also of the monster. There was a loud bang, and in thirty
seconds we were at a standstill. The monster’s off fore-foot troubled
it, and the chauffeur said, “Yes, sir,--burst.”

So the burst boot was taken off and a new one put on, a boot that had
never been on foot before. The foot in question was held up on a jack
during this operation, and the new boot laced up with a pump. This took
exactly twenty-five minutes. Then the monster got his spoon going again,
and said, “Let me run: oh, let me run!” And for fifteen miles on a
straight and empty road it ran. I timed the miles, but shall not produce
their chronology for the benefit of a forsworn constabulary.

But there were no more dithyrambics that morning. We should have reached
Hunstanton in time for lunch. Instead, we waited to repair our fourth
puncture at 1.45 P.M., twenty-five miles short of our destination. This
fourth puncture was caused by a spicule of flint three-quarters of an
inch long--sharp, it is true, but weighing perhaps two pennyweights,
while we weighed two tons. It seemed an impertinence. So we lunched at a
wayside inn, and during lunch the pundits held a consultation, of which
the upshot was this:

We had no more boots for our monster, for his off fore-foot had burst
once, and punctured once (thus necessitating two socks and one boot).
Similarly, but more so, his off hind-foot had burst twice (thus
necessitating two boots and two socks). Now, there was no certain
shoemaker’s shop at Hunstanton, as far as we knew, but there was a
regular universal store at King’s Lynn, which was about equidistant.

And, so said the chauffeur, there was something wrong with the monster’s
spoon (ignition), and he didn’t rightly know what, and therefore it
seemed the prudent part not to go to Hunstanton (lunch, a thing of the
preterite, having been the object), but to the well-supplied King’s
Lynn. And we all breathed a pious hope that we might get there.

Whizz: hoot: purr! The last boot held, the spoon went busily to the
monster’s mouth, and we just flowed into King’s Lynn. The return
journey, so I vaguely gathered, would be made by other roads; but
personally, intoxicated with air and movement, I neither asked nor
desired to know what those roads would be. This one small but rather
salient fact is necessary to record here, that as we waited at King’s
Lynn, and as we buzzed homewards afterwards, no thought of Bircham
entered my head at all. The subsequent hallucination, if hallucination
it was, was not, as far as I know, self-suggested. That we had gone out
of our way for the sake of the garage, I knew, and that was all. Harry
also told me that he did not know where our road would take us.

The rest that follows is the baldest possible narrative of what actually
occurred. But it seems to me, a humble student of the occult, to be
curious.

While we waited we had tea in a hotel looking on to a big empty square
of houses, and after tea we waited a very long time for our monster to
pick us up. Then the telephone from the garage inquired for “the
gentleman on the motor,” and since Harry had strolled out to get a local
evening paper with news of the last Test Match, I applied ear and mouth
to that elusive instrument. What I heard was not encouraging: the
ignition had gone very wrong indeed, and “perhaps” in an hour we should
be able to start. It was then about half-past six, and we were just
seventy-eight miles from Dunwich.

Harry came back soon after this, and I told him what the message from
the garage had been. What he said was this: “Then we shan’t get back
till long after dinner. We might just as well have camped out to see
your ghost.”

As I have already said, no notion of Bircham was in my mind, and I
mention this as evidence that, even if it had been, Harry’s remark
would have implied that we were not going through Bircham.

The hour lengthened itself into an hour and a half. Then the monster,
quite well again, came hooting round the corner, and we got in.

“Whack her up, Jack,” said Harry to the chauffeur. “The roads will be
empty. You had better light up at once.”

The monster, with its eyes agleam, was whacked up, and never in my life
have I been carried so cautiously and yet so swiftly. Jack never took a
risk or the possibility of a risk, but when the road was clear and open
he let the monster run just as fast as it was able. Its eyes made day of
the road fifty yards ahead, and the romance of night was fairyland round
us. Hares started from the roadside, and raced in front of us for a
hundred yards, then just wheeled in time to avoid the ear-flaps of the
great triumphant brute that carried us. Moths flitted across, struck
sometimes by the lenses of its eyes, and the miles peeled over our
shoulders. When It occurred we were going top-speed. And this was
It--quite unsensational, but to us quite inexplicable unless my midnight
imaginings happened to be true.

As I have said, I was in command of the hooter and of the syren. We were
flying along on a straight down-grade, as fast as ever we could go, for
the engines were working, though the decline was considerable. Then
quite suddenly I saw in front of us a thick cloud of dust, and knew
instinctively and on the instant, without thought or reasoning, what
that must mean. Evidently something going very fast (or else so large a
cloud could not have been raised) was in front of us, and going in the
same direction as ourselves. Had it been something on the road coming to
meet us, we should of course have seen the vehicle first and run into
the dust-cloud afterwards. Had it, again, been something of low speed--a
horse and dog-cart, for instance--no such dust could have been raised.
But, as it was, I knew at once that there was a motor travelling swiftly
just ahead of us, also that it was not going as fast as we were, or we
should have run into its dust much more gradually. But we went into it
as into a suddenly lowered curtain.

Then I shouted to Jack. “Slow down, and put on the brake,” I shrieked.
“There’s something just ahead of us.”

As I spoke I wrought a wild concerto on the hooter, and with my right
hand groped for the syren, but did not find it. Simultaneously I heard a
wild, frightened shriek, just as if I had sounded the syren myself. Jack
had felt for it too, and our hands fingered each other. Then we entered
the dust-cloud.

We slowed down with extraordinary rapidity, and still peering ahead we
went dead-slow through it. I had not put on my goggles after leaving
King’s Lynn, and the dust stung and smarted in my eyes. It was not,
therefore, a belt of fog, but real road-dust. And at the moment we crept
through it I felt Harry’s hands on my shoulder.

“There’s something just ahead,” he said. “Look! don’t you see the tail
light?”

As a matter of fact, I did not; and, still going very slow, we came out
of that dust-cloud. The broad empty road stretched in front of us; a
hedge was on each side, and there was no turning either to right or
left. Only, on the right, was a lodge, and gates which were closed. The
lodge had no lights in any window.

Then we came to a standstill; the air was dead-calm, not a leaf in the
hedgerow trees was moving, not a grain of dust was lifted from the road.
But, behind, the dust-cloud still hung in the air, and stopped
dead-short at the closed lodge-gates. We had moved very slowly for the
last hundred yards: it was difficult to suppose that it was of our
making. Then Jack spoke, with a curious crack in his voice.

“It must have been a motor, sir,” he said. “But where is it?”

I had no reply to this, and from behind another voice, Harry’s voice,
spoke. For the moment I did not recognise it, for it was strained and
faltering.

“Did you open the syren?” he asked. “It didn’t sound like our syren. It
sounded like, like----”

“I didn’t open the syren,” said I.

Then we went on again. Soon we came to scattered lights in houses by the
wayside.

“What’s this place?” I asked Jack.

“Bircham, sir,” said he.




GAVON’S EVE


It is only the largest kind of ordnance map that records the existence
of the village of Gavon, in the shire of Sutherland, and it is perhaps
surprising that any map on whatever scale should mark so small and
huddled a group of huts, set on a bare, bleak headland between moor and
sea, and, so one would have thought, of no import at all to any who did
not happen to live there. But the river Gavon, on the right bank of
which stand this half-dozen of chimneyless and wind-swept habitations,
is a geographical fact of far greater interest to outsiders, for the
salmon there are heavy fish, the mouth of the river is clear of nets,
and all the way up to Gavon Loch, some six miles inland, the
coffee-coloured water lies in pool after deep pool, which verge, if the
river is in order and the angler moderately sanguine, on a fishing
probability amounting almost to a certainty. In any case during the
first fortnight of September last I had no blank day on those delectable
waters, and up till the 15th of that month there was no day on which
some one at the lodge in which I was stopping did not land a fish out of
the famous Picts’ pool. But after the 15th that pool was not fished
again. The reason why is here set forward.

The river at this point, after some hundred yards of rapid, makes a
sudden turn round a rocky angle, and plunges madly into the pool itself.
Very deep water lies at the head of it, but deeper still further down on
the east side, where a portion of the stream flicks back again in a
swift dark backwater towards the top of the pool again. It is fishable
only from the western bank, for to the east, above this backwater, a
great wall of black and basaltic rock, heaved up no doubt by some fault
in strata, rises sheer from the river to the height of some sixty feet.
It is in fact nearly precipitous on both sides, heavily serrated at the
top, and of so curious a thinness, that at about the middle of it where
a fissure breaks its topmost edge, and some twenty feet from the top,
there exists a long hole, a sort of lancet window, one would say, right
through the rock, so that a slit of daylight can be seen through it.
Since, therefore, no one would care to cast his line standing perched on
that razor-edged eminence, the pool must needs be fished from the
western bank. A decent fly, however, will cover it all.

It is on the western bank that there stand the remains of that which
gave its title to the pool, namely, the ruins of a Pict castle, built
out of rough and scarcely hewn masonry, unmortared but on a certain
large and impressive scale, and in a very well-preserved condition
considering its extreme antiquity. It is circular in shape and measures
some twenty yards of diameter in its internal span. A staircase of large
blocks with a rise of at least a foot leads up to the main gate, and
opposite this on the side towards the river is another smaller postern
through which down a rather hazardously steep slope a scrambling path,
where progress demands both caution and activity, conducts to the head
of the pool which lies immediately beneath it. A gate-chamber still
roofed over exists in the solid wall: inside there are foundation
indications of three rooms, and in the centre of all a very deep hole,
probably a well. Finally, just outside the postern leading to the river
is a small artificially levelled platform, some twenty feet across, as
if made to support some super-incumbent edifice. Certain stone slabs and
blocks are dispersed over it.

Brora, the post-town of Gavon, lies some six miles to the south-west,
and from it a track over the moor leads to the rapids immediately above
the Picts’ pool, across which by somewhat extravagant striding from
boulder to boulder a man can pass dry-foot when the river is low, and
make his way up a steep path to the north of the basaltic rock, and so
to the village. But this transit demands a steady head, and at the best
is a somewhat giddy passage. Otherwise the road between it and Brora
lies in a long detour higher up the moor, passing by the gates of Gavon
Lodge, where I was stopping. For some vague and ill-defined reason the
pool itself and the Picts’ Castle had an uneasy reputation on the
country side, and several times trudging back from a day’s fishing I
have known my gillie take a longish circuit, though heavy with fish,
rather than make this short cut in the dusk by the castle. On the first
occasion when Sandy, a strapping yellow-bearded viking of twenty-five,
did this he gave as a reason that the ground round about the castle was
“mossy,” though as a God-fearing man, he must have known he lied. But on
another occasion he was more frank, and said that the Picts’ pool was
“no canny” after sunset. I am now inclined to agree with him, though,
when he lied about it, I think it was because as a God-fearing man he
feared the devil also.

It was on the evening of September 14 that I was walking back with my
host, Hugh Graham, from the forest beyond the lodge. It had been a day
unseasonably hot for the time of year, and the hills were blanketed with
soft, furry clouds. Sandy, the gillie of whom I have spoken, was behind
with the ponies, and, idly enough, I told Hugh about his strange
distaste for the Picts’ pool after sunset. He listened, frowning a
little.

“That’s curious,” he said. “I know there is some dim local superstition
about the place, but last year certainly Sandy used to laugh at it. I
remember asking him what ailed the place, and he said he thought
nothing about the rubbish folk talked. But this year you say he avoids
it.”

“On several occasions with me he has done so.”

Hugh smoked a while in silence, striding noiselessly over the dusky
fragrant heather.

“Poor chap,” he said, “I don’t know what to do about him. He’s becoming
useless.”

“Drink?” I asked.

“Yes, drink in a secondary manner. But trouble led to drink, and
trouble, I am afraid, is leading him to worse than drink.”

“The only thing worse than drink is the devil,” I remarked.

“Precisely. That’s where he is going. He goes there often.”

“What on earth do you mean?” I asked.

“Well, it’s rather curious,” said Hugh. “You know I dabble a bit in
folklore and local superstition, and I believe I am on the track of
something odder than odd. Just wait a moment.”

We stood there in the gathering dusk till the ponies laboured up the
hillside to us, Sandy with his six feet of lithe strength strolling
easily beside them up the steep brae, as if his long day’s trudging had
but served to half awaken his dormant powers of limb.

“Going to see Mistress Macpherson again to-night?” asked Hugh.

“Aye, puir body,” said Sandy. “She’s auld, and she’s lone.”

“Very kind of you, Sandy,” said Hugh, and we walked on.

“What then?” I asked when the ponies had fallen behind again.

“Why, superstition lingers here,” said Hugh, “and it’s supposed she’s a
witch. To be quite candid with you, the thing interests me a good deal.
Supposing you asked me, on oath, whether I believed in witches, I should
say ‘No.’ But if you asked me again, on oath, whether I suspected I
believed in them, I should, I think, say ‘Yes.’ And the fifteenth of
this month--to-morrow--is Gavon’s Eve.”

“And what in Heaven’s name is that?” I asked. “And who is Gavon? And
what’s the trouble?”

“Well, Gavon is the person, I suppose, not saint, who is what we should
call the eponymous hero of this district. And the trouble is Sandy’s
trouble. Rather a long story. But there’s a long mile in front of us
yet, if you care to be told.”

During that mile I heard. Sandy had been engaged a year ago to a girl of
Gavon who was in service at Inverness. In March last he had gone,
without giving notice, to see her, and as he walked up the street in
which her mistress’ house stood, had met her suddenly face to face, in
company with a man whose clipped speech betrayed him English, whose
manner a kind of gentleman. He had a flourish of his hat for Sandy,
pleasure to see him, and scarcely any need of explanation as to how he
came to be walking with Catrine. It was the most natural thing possible,
for a city like Inverness boasted its innocent urbanities, and a girl
could stroll with a man. And for the time, since also Catrine was so
frankly pleased to see him, Sandy was satisfied. But after his return to
Gavon, suspicion, fungus-like, grew rank in his mind, with the result
that a month ago he had, with infinite pains and blottings, written a
letter to Catrine, urging her return and immediate marriage. Thereafter
it was known that she had left Inverness; it was known that she had
arrived by train at Brora. From Brora she had started to walk across the
moor by the path leading just above the Picts’ Castle, crossing the
rapids to Gavon, leaving her box to be sent by the carrier. But at Gavon
she had never arrived. Also it was said that, though it was a hot
afternoon, she wore a big cloak.

By this time we had come to the lodge, the lights of which showed dim
and blurred through the thick hill-mists that had streamed sullenly down
from the higher ground.

“And the rest,” said Hugh, “which is as fantastic as this is sober fact,
I will tell you later.”

Now, a fruit-bearing determination to go to bed is, to my mind, as
difficult to ripen as a fruit-bearing determination to get up, and in
spite of our long day, I was glad when Hugh (the rest of the men having
yawned themselves out of the smoking-room) came back from the hospitable
dispensing of bedroom candlesticks with a briskness that denoted that,
as far as he was concerned, the distressing determination was not
imminent.

“As regards Sandy,” I suggested.

“Ah, I also was thinking of that,” he said. “Well, Catrine Gordon left
Brora, and never arrived here. That is fact. Now for what remains. Have
you any remembrance of a woman always alone walking about the moor by
the loch? I think I once called your attention to her.”

“Yes, I remember,” I said. “Not Catrine, surely; a very old woman, awful
to look at. Moustache, whiskers, and muttering to herself. Always
looking at the ground, too.”

“Yes, that is she--not Catrine. Catrine! My word, a May morning! But the
other--it is Mrs Macpherson, reputed witch. Well, Sandy trudges there, a
mile and more away, every night to see her. You know Sandy: Adonis of
the north. Now, can you account by any natural explanation for that
fact? That he goes off after a long day to see an old hag in the hills?”

“It would seem unlikely,” said I.

“Unlikely! Well, yes, unlikely.”

Hugh got up from his chair and crossed the room to where a bookcase of
rather fusty-looking volumes stood between windows. He took a small
morocco-backed book from a top shelf.

“Superstitions of Sutherlandshire,” he said, as he handed it to me.
“Turn to page 128, and read.”

I obeyed, and read.

“September 15 appears to have been the date of what we may call this
devil festival. On the night of that day the powers of darkness held
pre-eminent dominion, and over-rode for any who were abroad that night
and invoked their aid, the protective Providence of Almighty God.
Witches, therefore, above all, were peculiarly potent. On this night any
witch could entice to herself the heart and the love of any young man
who consulted her on matters of philtre or love charm, with the result
that on any night in succeeding years of the same date, he, though he
was lawfully affianced and wedded, would for that night be hers. If,
however, he should call on the name of God through any sudden grace of
the Spirit, her charm would be of no avail. On this night, too, all
witches had the power by certain dreadful incantations and indescribable
profanities, to raise from the dead those who had committed suicide.”

“Top of the next page,” said Hugh. “Leave out this next paragraph; it
does not bear on this last.”

“Near a small village in this country,” I read, “called Gavon, the moon
at midnight is said to shine through a certain gap or fissure in a wall
of rock close beside the river on to the ruins of a Pict castle, so
that the light of its beams falls on to a large flat stone erected there
near the gate, and supposed by some to be an ancient and pagan altar. At
that moment, so the superstition still lingers in the country side, the
evil and malignant spirits which hold sway on Gavon’s Eve, are at the
zenith of their powers, and those who invoke their aid at this moment
and in this place, will, though with infinite peril to their immortal
souls, get all that they desire of them.”

The paragraph on the subject ended here, and I shut the book.

“Well?” I asked.

“Under favourable circumstances two and two make four,” said Hugh.

“And four means----”

“This. Sandy is certainly in consultation with a woman who is supposed
to be a witch, whose path no crofter will cross after nightfall. He
wants to learn, at whatever cost, poor devil, what happened to Catrine.
Thus I think it more than possible that to-morrow, at midnight, there
will be folk by the Picts’ pool. There is another curious thing. I was
fishing there yesterday, and just opposite the river gate of the castle,
someone has set up a great flat stone, which has been dragged (for I
noticed the crushed grass) from the débris at the bottom of the slope.”

“You mean that the old hag is going to try to raise the body of Catrine,
if she is dead?”

“Yes, and I mean to see myself what happens. Come too.”

The next day Hugh and I fished down the river from the lodge, taking
with us not Sandy, but another gillie, and ate our lunch on the slope of
the Picts’ Castle after landing a couple of fish there. Even as Hugh had
said, a great flat slab of stone had been dragged on to the platform
outside the river gate of the castle, where it rested on certain rude
supports, which, now that it was in place, seemed certainly designed to
receive it. It was also exactly opposite that lancet window in the
basaltic rock across the pool, so that if the moon at midnight did shine
through it, the light would fall on the stone. This then was the almost
certain scene of the incantations.

Below the platform, as I have said, the ground fell rapidly away to the
level of the pool, which owing to rain on the hills was running very
high, and, streaked with lines of greyish bubbles, poured down in
amazing and ear-filling volume. But directly underneath the steep
escarpment of rock on the far side of the pool it lay foamless and
black, a still backwater of great depth. Above the altar-like erection
again the ground rose up seven rough-hewn steps to the gate itself, on
each side of which, to the height of about four feet, ran the circular
wall of the castle. Inside again were the remains of partition walls
between the three chambers, and it was in the one nearest to the river
gate that we determined to conceal ourselves that night. From there,
should the witch and Sandy keep tryst at the altar, any sound of
movement would reach us, and through the aperture of the gate itself we
could see, concealed in the shadow of the wall, whatever took place at
the altar or down below at the pool. The lodge, finally, was but a short
ten minutes away, if one went in the direct line, so that by starting at
a quarter to twelve that night, we could enter the Picts’ Castle by the
gate away from the river, thus not betraying our presence to those who
might be waiting for the moment when the moon should shine through the
lancet window in the wall of rock on to the altar in front of the river
gate.

Night fell very still and windless, and when not long before midnight we
let ourselves silently out of the lodge, though to the east the sky was
clear, a black continent of cloud was creeping up from the west, and had
now nearly reached the zenith. Out of the remote fringes of it
occasional lightning winked, and the growl of very distant thunder
sounded drowsily at long intervals after. But it seemed to me as if
another storm hung over our heads, ready every moment to burst, for the
oppression in the air was of a far heavier quality than so distant a
disturbance could have accounted for. To the east, however, the sky was
still luminously clear; the curiously hard edges of the western cloud
were star-embroidered, and by the dove-coloured light in the east it was
evident that the moonrise over the moor was imminent. And though I did
not in my heart believe that our expedition would end in anything but
yawns, I was conscious of an extreme tension and rawness of nerves,
which I set down to the thunder-charged air.

For noiselessness of footstep we had both put on india-rubber soled
shoes, and all the way down to the pool we heard nothing but the distant
thunder and our own padded tread. Very silently and cautiously we
ascended the steps of the gate away from the river, and keeping close to
the wall inside, sidled round to the river gate and peered out. For the
first moment I could see nothing, so black lay the shadow of the
rock-wall opposite across the pool, but by degrees I made out the lumps
and line of the glimmering foam which streaked the water. High as the
river was running this morning it was infinitely more voluminous and
turbulent now, and the sound of it filled and bewildered the ear with
its sonorous roaring. Only under the very base of the rock opposite it
ran quite black and unflecked by foam: there lay the deep still surface
of the backwater. Then suddenly I saw something black move in the
dimness in front of me, and against the grey foam rose up first the
head, then the shoulders, and finally the whole figure of a woman
coming towards us up the bank. Behind her walked another, a man, and the
two came to where the altar of stone had been newly erected and stood
there side by side silhouetted against the churned white of the stream.
Hugh had seen too, and touched me on the arm to call my attention. So
far then he was right: there was no mistaking the stalwart proportions
of Sandy.

Suddenly across the gloom shot a tiny spear of light, and momentarily as
we watched, it grew larger and longer, till a tall beam, as from some
window cut in the rock opposite, was shed on the bank below us. It moved
slowly, imperceptibly to the left till it struck full between the two
black figures standing there, and shone with a curious bluish gleam on
the flat stone in front of them. Then the roar of the river was suddenly
overscored by a dreadful screaming voice, the voice of a woman, and from
her side her arms shot up and out as if in invocation of some power. At
first I could catch none of the words, but soon from repetition they
began to convey an intelligible message to my brain, and I was listening
as in the paralytic horror of nightmare to a bellowing of the most
hideous and un-nameable profanity. What I heard I cannot bring myself to
record; suffice it to say that Satan was invoked by every adoring and
reverent name, that cursing and unspeakable malediction was poured forth
on Him whom we hold most holy. Then the yelling voice ceased as
suddenly as it had begun, and for a moment there was silence again, but
for the reverberating river.

Then once more that horror of sound was uplifted.

“So, Catrine Gordon,” it cried, “I bid ye in the name of my master and
your’s to rise from where ye lie. Up with ye--up!”

Once more there was silence; then I heard Hugh at my elbow draw a quick
sobbing breath, and his finger pointed unsteadily to the dead black
water below the rock. And I too looked and saw.

Right under the rock there appeared a pale subaqueous light, which waved
and quivered in the stream. At first it was very small and dim, but as
we looked it seemed to swim upwards from remote depths and grew larger
till I suppose the space of some square yard was illuminated by it. Then
the surface of the water was broken, and a head, the head of a girl,
dead-white and with long, flowing hair, appeared above the stream. Her
eyes were shut, the corners of her mouth drooped as in sleep, and the
moving water stood in a frill round her neck. Higher and higher rose the
figure out of the tide, till at last it stood, luminous in itself, so it
appeared, up to the middle. The head was bent down over the breast, and
the hands clasped together. As it emerged from the water it seemed to
get nearer, and was by now half-way across the pool, moving quietly and
steadily against the great flood of the hurrying river.

Then I heard a man’s voice crying out in a sort of strangled agony.

“Catrine!” it cried; “Catrine! In God’s name; in God’s name!”

In two strides Sandy had rushed down the steep bank, and hurled himself
out into that mad swirl of waters. For one moment I saw his arms flung
up into the sky, the next he had altogether gone. And on the utterance
of that name the unholy vision had vanished too, while simultaneously
there burst in front of us a light so blinding, followed by a crack of
thunder so appalling to the senses, that I know I just hid my face in my
hands. At once, as if the flood-gates of the sky had been opened, the
deluge was on us, not like rain, but like one sheet of solid water, so
that we cowered under it. Any hope or attempt to rescue Sandy was out of
the question; to dive into that whirlpool of mad water meant instant
death, and even had it been possible for any swimmer to live there, in
the blackness of the night there was absolutely no chance of finding
him. Besides, even if it had been possible to save him, I doubt whether
I was sufficiently master of my flesh and blood as to endure to plunge
where that apparition had risen.

Then, as we lay there, another horror filled and possessed my mind.
Somewhere close to us in the darkness was that woman whose yelling voice
just now had made my blood run ice-cold, while it brought the streaming
sweat to my forehead. At that moment I turned to Hugh.

“I cannot stop here,” I said. “I must run, run right away. Where is
She?”

“Did you not see?” he asked.

“No. What happened?”

“The lightning struck the stone within a few inches of where she was
standing. We--we must go and look for her.”

I followed him down the slope, shaking as if I had the palsy, and
groping with my hands on the ground in front of me, in deadly terror of
encountering something human. The thunder-clouds had in the last few
minutes spread over the moon, so that no ray from the window in the rock
guided our search. But up and down the bank from the stone that lay
shattered there to the edge of the pool we groped and stumbled, but
found nothing. At length we gave it up: it seemed morally certain that
she, too, had rolled down the bank after the lightning stroke, and lay
somewhere deep in the pool from which she had called the dead.

None fished the pool next day, but men with drag-nets came from Brora.
Right under the rock in the backwater lay two bodies, close together,
Sandy and the dead girl. Of the other they found nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

It would seem, then, that Catrine Gordon, in answer to Sandy’s letter,
left Inverness in heavy trouble. What happened afterwards can only be
conjectured, but it seems likely she took the short cut to Gavon,
meaning to cross the river on the boulders above the Picts’ pool. But
whether she slipped accidentally in her passage, and so was drawn down
by the hungry water, or whether, unable to face the future, she had
thrown herself into the pool, we can only guess. In any case they sleep
together now in the bleak, wind-swept graveyard at Brora, in obedience
to the inscrutable designs of God.




THE CONFESSION OF CHARLES LINKWORTH


Dr Teesdale had occasion to attend the condemned man once or twice
during the week before his execution, and found him, as is often the
case, when his last hope of life has vanished, quiet and perfectly
resigned to his fate, and not seeming to look forward with any dread to
the morning that each hour that passed brought nearer and nearer. The
bitterness of death appeared to be over for him: it was done with when
he was told that his appeal was refused. But for those days while hope
was not yet quite abandoned, the wretched man had drank of death daily.
In all his experience the doctor had never seen a man so wildly and
passionately tenacious of life, nor one so strongly knit to this
material world by the sheer animal lust of living. Then the news that
hope could no longer be entertained was told him, and his spirit passed
out of the grip of that agony of torture and suspense, and accepted the
inevitable with indifference. Yet the change was so extraordinary that
it seemed to the doctor rather that the news had completely stunned his
powers of feeling, and he was below the numbed surface, still knit into
material things as strongly as ever. He had fainted when the result was
told him, and Dr Teesdale had been called in to attend him. But the fit
was but transient, and he came out of it into full consciousness of what
had happened.

The murder had been a deed of peculiar horror, and there was nothing of
sympathy in the mind of the public towards the perpetrator. Charles
Linkworth, who now lay under capital sentence, was the keeper of a small
stationery store in Sheffield, and there lived with him his wife and
mother. The latter was the victim of his atrocious crime; the motive of
it being to get possession of the sum of five hundred pounds, which was
this woman’s property. Linkworth, as came out at the trial, was in debt
to the extent of a hundred pounds at the time, and during his wife’s
absence from home, on a visit to relations, he strangled his mother, and
during the night buried the body in the small back-garden of his house.
On his wife’s return, he had a sufficiently plausible tale to account
for the elder Mrs Linkworth’s disappearance, for there had been constant
jarrings and bickerings between him and his mother for the last year or
two, and she had more than once threatened to withdraw herself and the
eight shillings a week which she contributed to household expenses, and
purchase an annuity with her money. It was true, also, that during the
younger Mrs Linkworth’s absence from home, mother and son had had a
violent quarrel arising originally from some trivial point in household
management, and that in consequence of this, she had actually drawn her
money out of the bank, intending to leave Sheffield next day and settle
in London where she had friends. That evening she told him this, and
during the night he killed her.

His next step, before his wife’s return, was logical and sound. He
packed up all his mother’s possessions and took them to the station,
from which he saw them despatched to town by passenger train, and in the
evening he asked several friends in to supper, and told them of his
mother’s departure. He did not (logically also, and in accordance with
what they probably already knew) feign regret, but said that he and she
had never got on well together, and that the cause of peace and
quietness was furthered by her going. He told the same story to his wife
on her return, identical in every detail, adding, however, that the
quarrel had been a violent one, and that his mother had not even left
him her address. This again was wisely thought of: it would prevent his
wife from writing to her. She appeared to accept his story completely:
indeed there was nothing strange or suspicious about it.

For a while he behaved with the composure and astuteness which most
criminals possess up to a certain point, the lack of which, after that,
is generally the cause of their detection. He did not, for instance,
immediately pay off his debts, but took into his house a young man as
lodger, who occupied his mother’s room, and he dismissed the assistant
in his shop, and did the entire serving himself. This gave the
impression of economy, and at the same time he openly spoke of the great
improvement in his trade, and not till a month had passed did he cash
any of the bank-notes which he had found in a locked drawer in his
mother’s room. Then he changed two notes of fifty pounds and paid off
his creditors.

At that point his astuteness and composure failed him. He opened a
deposit account at a local bank with four more fifty-pound notes,
instead of being patient, and increasing his balance at the savings bank
pound by pound, and he got uneasy about that which he had buried deep
enough for security in the back garden. Thinking to render himself safer
in this regard, he ordered a cartload of slag and stone fragments and
with the help of his lodger employed the summer evenings when work was
over, in building a sort of rockery over the spot. Then came the chance
circumstance which really set match to this dangerous train. There was a
fire in the lost luggage office at King’s Cross Station (from which he
ought to have claimed his mother’s property) and one of the two boxes
was partially burned. The company was liable for compensation, and his
mother’s name on her linen, and a letter with the Sheffield address on
it, led to the arrival of a purely official and formal notice, stating
that the company were prepared to consider claims. It was directed to
Mrs Linkworth, and Charles Linkworth’s wife received and read it.

It seemed a sufficiently harmless document, but it was endorsed with his
death-warrant. For he could give no explanation at all of the fact of
the boxes still lying at King’s Cross Station, beyond suggesting that
some accident had happened to his mother. Clearly he had to put the
matter in the hands of the police, with a view to tracing her movements,
and if it proved that she was dead, claiming her property, which she had
already drawn out of the bank. Such at least was the course urged on him
by his wife and lodger, in whose presence the communication from the
railway officials was read out, and it was impossible to refuse to take
it. Then the silent, uncreaking machinery of justice, characteristic of
England, began to move forward. Quiet men lounged about Smith Street,
visited banks, observed the supposed increase in trade, and from a house
near by looked into the garden where ferns were already flourishing on
the rockery. Then came the arrest and the trial, which did not last very
long, and on a certain Saturday night the verdict. Smart women in large
hats had made the court bright with colour, and in all the crowd there
was not one who felt any sympathy with the young athletic-looking man
who was condemned. Many of the audience were elderly and respectable
mothers, and the crime had been an outrage on motherhood, and they
listened to the unfolding of the flawless evidence with strong approval.
They thrilled a little when the judge put on the awful and ludicrous
little black cap, and spoke the sentence appointed by God.

Linkworth went to pay the penalty for the atrocious deed, which no one
who had heard the evidence could possibly doubt that he had done, with
the same indifference as had marked his entire demeanour since he knew
his appeal had failed. The prison chaplain who had attended him had done
his utmost to get him to confess, but his efforts had been quite
ineffectual, and to the last he asserted, though without protestation,
his innocence. On a bright September morning, when the sun shone warm on
the terrible little procession that crossed the prison yard to the shed
where was erected the apparatus of death, justice was done, and Dr
Teesdale was satisfied that life was immediately extinct. He had been
present on the scaffold, had watched the bolt drawn, and the hooded and
pinioned figure drop into the pit. He had heard the chunk and creak of
the rope as the sudden weight came on to it, and looking down he had
seen the queer twitchings of the hanged body. They had lasted but a
second or two; the execution had been perfectly satisfactory.

An hour later he made the post-mortem examination, and found that his
view had been correct: the vertebrae of the spine had been broken at the
neck, and death must have been absolutely instantaneous. It was hardly
necessary even to make that little piece of dissection that proved this,
but for the sake of form he did so. And at that moment he had a very
curious and vivid mental impression that the spirit of the dead man was
close beside him, as if it still dwelt in the broken habitation of its
body. But there was no question at all that the body was dead: it had
been dead an hour. Then followed another little circumstance that at the
first seemed insignificant though curious also. One of the warders
entered, and asked if the rope which had been used an hour ago, and was
the hangman’s perquisite, had by mistake been brought into the mortuary
with the body. But there was no trace of it, and it seemed to have
vanished altogether though it was a singular thing to be lost: it was
not here; it was not on the scaffold. And though the disappearance was
of no particular moment, it was quite inexplicable.

Dr Teesdale was a bachelor and a man of independent means, and lived in
a tall-windowed and commodious house in Bedford Square, where a plain
cook of surpassing excellence looked after his food, and her husband his
person. There was no need for him to practise a profession at all, and
he performed his work at the prison for the sake of the study of the
minds of criminals. Most crime--the transgression, that is, of the rule
of conduct which the human race has framed for the sake of its own
preservation--he held to be either the result of some abnormality of the
brain, or of starvation. Crimes of theft, for instance, he would by no
means refer to one head; often it is true they were the result of actual
want, but more often dictated by some obscure disease of the brain. In
marked cases it was labelled as kleptomania, but he was convinced there
were many others which did not fall directly under the dictation of
physical need. More especially was this the case where the crime in
question involved also some deed of violence, and he mentally placed
underneath this heading, as he went home that evening, the criminal at
whose last moments he had been present that morning. The crime had been
abominable, the need of money not so very pressing, and the very
abomination and unnaturalness of the murder inclined him to consider the
murderer as lunatic rather than criminal. He had been, as far as was
known, a man of quiet and kindly disposition, a good husband, a sociable
neighbour. And then he had committed a crime, just one, which put him
outside all pales. So monstrous a deed, whether perpetrated by a sane
man or a mad one, was intolerable; there was no use for the doer of it
on this planet at all. But somehow the doctor felt that he would have
been more at one with the execution of justice, if the dead man had
confessed. It was morally certain that he was guilty, but he wished that
when there was no longer any hope for him, he had endorsed the verdict
himself.

He dined alone that evening, and after dinner sat in his study which
adjoined the dining-room, and feeling disinclined to read, sat in his
great red chair opposite the fireplace, and let his mind graze where it
would. At once almost, it went back to the curious sensation he had
experienced that morning, of feeling that the spirit of Linkworth was
present in the mortuary, though life had been extinct for an hour. It
was not the first time, especially in cases of sudden death, that he had
felt a similar conviction, though perhaps it had never been quite so
unmistakable as it had been to-day. Yet the feeling, to his mind, was
quite probably formed on a natural and psychical truth. The spirit--it
may be remarked that he was a believer in the doctrine of future life,
and the non-extinction of the soul with the death of the body--was very
likely unable or unwilling to quit at once and altogether the earthly
habitation, very likely it lingered there, earth-bound, for a while. In
his leisure hours Dr Teesdale was a considerable student of the occult,
for like most advanced and proficient physicians, he clearly recognised
how narrow was the boundary of separation between soul and body, how
tremendous the influence of the intangible was over material things,
and it presented no difficulty to his mind that a disembodied spirit
should be able to communicate directly with those who still were bounded
by the finite and material.

His meditations, which were beginning to group themselves into definite
sequence, were interrupted at this moment. On his desk near at hand
stood his telephone, and the bell rang, not with its usual metallic
insistence, but very faintly, as if the current was weak, or the
mechanism impaired. However, it certainly was ringing, and he got up and
took the combined ear and mouth-piece off its hook.

“Yes, yes,” he said, “who is it?”

There was a whisper in reply almost inaudible, and quite unintelligible.

“I can’t hear you,” he said.

Again the whisper sounded, but with no greater distinctness. Then it
ceased altogether.

He stood there, for some half minute or so, waiting for it to be
renewed, but beyond the usual chuckling and croaking, which showed,
however, that he was in communication with some other instrument, there
was silence. Then he replaced the receiver, rang up the Exchange, and
gave his number.

“Can you tell me what number rang me up just now?” he asked.

There was a short pause, then it was given him. It was the number of the
prison, where he was doctor.

“Put me on to it, please,” he said.

This was done.

“You rang me up just now,” he said down the tube. “Yes; I am Doctor
Teesdale. What is it? I could not hear what you said.”

The voice came back quite clear and intelligible.

“Some mistake, sir,” it said, “We haven’t rang you up.”

“But the exchange tells me you did, three minutes ago.”

“Mistake at the Exchange, sir,” said the voice.

“Very odd. Well, good-night. Warder Draycott, isn’t it?”

“Yes, sir; good-night, sir.”

Dr Teesdale went back to his big arm-chair, still less inclined to read.
He let his thoughts wander on for a while, without giving them definite
direction, but ever and again his mind kept coming back to that strange
little incident of the telephone. Often and often he had been rung up by
some mistake, often and often he had been put on to the wrong number by
the exchange, but there was something in this very subdued ringing of
the telephone bell, and the unintelligible whisperings at the other end
that suggested a very curious train of reflection to his mind, and soon
he found himself pacing up and down his room, with his thoughts eagerly
feeding on a most unusual pasture.

“But it’s impossible,” he said, aloud.

He went down as usual to the prison next morning and once again he was
strangely beset with the feeling that there was some unseen presence
there. He had before now had some odd psychical experiences, and knew
that he was a “sensitive”--one, that is, who is capable, under certain
circumstances, of receiving supernormal impressions, and of having
glimpses of the unseen world that lies about us. And this morning the
presence of which he was conscious was that of the man who had been
executed yesterday morning. It was local, and he felt it most strongly
in the little prison yard, and as he passed the door of the condemned
cell. So strong was it there that he would not have been surprised if
the figure of the man had been visible to him, and as he passed through
the door at the end of the passage, he turned round, actually expecting
to see it. All the time, too, he was aware of a profound horror at his
heart, this unseen presence strangely disturbed him. And the poor soul,
he felt, wanted something done for it. Not for a moment did he doubt
that this impression of his was objective, it was no imaginative phantom
of his own invention that made itself so real. The spirit of Linkworth
was there.

He passed into the infirmary, and for a couple of hours busied himself
with his work. But all the time he was aware that the same invisible
presence was near him, though its force was manifestly less here than in
those places which had been more intimately associated with the man.
Finally, before he left, in order to test his theory he looked into the
execution shed. But next moment with a face suddenly stricken pale, he
came out again, closing the door hastily. At the top of the steps stood
a figure hooded and pinioned, but hazy of outline and only faintly
visible. But it was visible, there was no mistake about it.

Dr Teesdale was a man of good nerve, and he recovered himself almost
immediately, ashamed of his temporary panic. The terror that had
blanched his face was chiefly the effect of startled nerves, not of
terrified heart, and yet deeply interested as he was in psychical
phenomena, he could not command himself sufficiently to go back there.
Or rather he commanded himself, but his muscles refused to act on the
message. If this poor earth-bound spirit had any communication to make
to him, he certainly much preferred that it should be made at a
distance. As far as he could understand, its range was circumscribed. It
haunted the prison yard, the condemned cell, the execution shed, it was
more faintly felt in the infirmary. Then a further point suggested
itself to his mind, and he went back to his room and sent for Warder
Draycott, who had answered him on the telephone last night.

“You are quite sure,” he asked, “that nobody rang me up last night, just
before I rang you up?”

There was a certain hesitation in the man’s manner which the doctor
noticed.

“I don’t see how it could be possible, sir,” he said, “I had been
sitting close by the telephone for half an hour before, and again before
that. I must have seen him, if anyone had been to the instrument.”

“And you _saw_ no one?” said the doctor with a slight emphasis.

The man became more markedly ill at ease.

“No, sir, I _saw_ no one,” he said, with the same emphasis.

Dr Teesdale looked away from him.

“But you had perhaps the impression that there was some one there?” he
asked, carelessly, as if it was a point of no interest.

Clearly Warder Draycott had something on his mind, which he found it
hard to speak of.

“Well, sir, if you put it like that,” he began. “But you would tell me I
was half asleep, or had eaten something that disagreed with me at my
supper.”

The doctor dropped his careless manner.

“I should do nothing of the kind,” he said, “any more than you would
tell me that I had dropped asleep last night, when I heard my telephone
bell ring. Mind you, Draycott, it did not ring as usual, I could only
just hear it ringing, though it was close to me. And I could only hear a
whisper when I put my ear to it. But when you spoke I heard you quite
distinctly. Now I believe there was something--somebody--at this end of
the telephone. You were here, and though you saw no one, you, too, felt
there was someone there.”

The man nodded.

“I’m not a nervous man, sir,” he said, “and I don’t deal in fancies. But
there was something there. It was hovering about the instrument, and it
wasn’t the wind, because there wasn’t a breath of wind stirring, and the
night was warm. And I shut the window to make certain. But it went about
the room, sir, for an hour or more. It rustled the leaves of the
telephone book, and it ruffled my hair when it came close to me. And it
was bitter cold, sir.”

The doctor looked him straight in the face.

“Did it remind you of what had been done yesterday morning?” he asked
suddenly.

Again the man hesitated.

“Yes, sir,” he said at length. “Convict Charles Linkworth.”

Dr Teesdale nodded reassuringly.

“That’s it,” he said. “Now, are you on duty to-night?”

“Yes, sir, I wish I wasn’t.”

“I know how you feel, I have felt exactly the same myself. Now whatever
this is, it seems to want to communicate with me. By the way, did you
have any disturbance in the prison last night?”

“Yes, sir, there was half a dozen men who had the nightmare. Yelling
and screaming they were, and quiet men too, usually. It happens
sometimes the night after an execution. I’ve known it before, though
nothing like what it was last night.”

“I see. Now, if this--this thing you can’t see wants to get at the
telephone again to-night, give it every chance. It will probably come
about the same time. I can’t tell you why, but that usually happens. So
unless you must, don’t be in this room where the telephone is, just for
an hour to give it plenty of time between half past nine and half past
ten. I will be ready for it at the other end. Supposing I am rung up, I
will, when it has finished, ring you up to make sure that I was not
being called in--in the usual way.

“And there is nothing to be afraid of, sir?” asked the man.

Dr Teesdale remembered his own moment of terror this morning, but he
spoke quite sincerely.

“I am sure there is nothing to be afraid of,” he said, reassuringly.

Dr Teesdale had a dinner engagement that night, which he broke, and was
sitting alone in his study by half past nine. In the present state of
human ignorance as to the law which governs the movements of spirits
severed from the body, he could not tell the warder why it was that
their visits are so often periodic, timed to punctuality according to
our scheme of hours, but in scenes of tabulated instances of the
appearance of _revenants_, especially if the soul was in sore need of
help, as might be the case here, he found that they came at the same
hour of day or night. As a rule, too, their power of making themselves
seen or heard or felt, grew greater for some little while after death,
subsequently growing weaker as they became less earth-bound, or often
after that ceasing altogether, and he was prepared to-night for a less
indistinct impression. The spirit apparently for the early hours of its
disembodiment is weak, like a moth newly broken out from its
chrysalis--and then suddenly the telephone bell rang, not so faintly as
the night before, but still not with its ordinary imperative tone.

Dr Teesdale instantly got up, put the receiver to his ears. And what he
heard was heart-broken sobbing, strong spasms that seemed to tear the
weeper.

He waited for a little before speaking, himself cold with some nameless
fear, and yet profoundly moved to help, if he was able.

“Yes, yes,” he said at length, hearing his own voice tremble. “I am Dr
Teesdale. What can I do for you? And who are you?” he added, though he
felt that it was a needless question.

Slowly the sobbing died down, the whispers took its place, still broken
by crying.

“I want to tell, sir--I want to tell--I must tell.”

“Yes, tell me, what is it?” said the doctor.

“No, not you--another gentleman, who used to come to see me. Will you
speak to him what I say to you?--I can’t make him hear me or see me.”

“Who are you?” asked Dr Teesdale suddenly.

“Charles Linkworth. I thought you knew. I am very miserable. I can’t
leave the prison--and it is cold. Will you send for the other
gentleman?”

“Do you mean the chaplain?” asked Dr Teesdale.

“Yes, the chaplain. He read the service when I went across the yard
yesterday. I shan’t be so miserable when I have told.”

The doctor hesitated a moment. This was a strange story that he would
have to tell Mr Dawkins, the prison chaplain, that at the other end of
the telephone was the spirit of the man executed yesterday. And yet he
soberly believed that it was so that this unhappy spirit was in misery,
and wanted to “tell.” There was no need to ask what he wanted to tell.

“Yes, I will ask him to come here,” he said at length.

“Thank you, sir, a thousand times. You will make him come, won’t you?”

The voice was growing fainter.

“It must be to-morrow night,” it said. “I can’t speak longer now. I have
to go to see--oh, my God, my God.”

The sobs broke out afresh, sounding fainter and fainter. But it was in a
frenzy of terrified interest that Dr Teesdale spoke.

“To see what?” he cried “Tell me what you are doing, what is happening
to you?”

“I can’t tell you; I mayn’t tell you,” said the voice very faint. “That
is part----” and it died away altogether.

Dr Teesdale waited a little, but there was no further sound of any kind,
except the chuckling and croaking of the instrument. He put the receiver
on to its hook again, and then became aware for the first time that his
forehead was streaming with some, cold dew of horror. His ears sang; his
heart beat very quick and faint, and he sat down to recover himself.
Once or twice he asked himself if it was possible that some terrible
joke was being played on him, but he knew that could not be so; he felt
perfectly sure that he had been speaking with a soul in torment of
contrition for the terrible and irremediable act it had committed. It
was no delusion of his senses, either; here in this comfortable room of
his in Bedford Square, with London cheerfully roaring round him, he had
spoken with the spirit of Charles Linkworth.

But he had no time (nor indeed inclination, for somehow his soul sat
shuddering within him) to indulge in meditation. First of all he rang up
the prison.

“Warder Draycott?” he asked.

There was a perceptible tremor in the man’s voice as he answered.

“Yes, sir. Is it Dr Teesdale?”

“Yes. Has anything happened here with you?”

Twice it seemed that the man tried to speak and could not. At the third
attempt the words came.

“Yes, sir. He has been here. I saw him go into the room where the
telephone is.”

“Ah! Did you speak to him?”

“No, sir: I sweated and prayed. And there’s half a dozen men as have
been screaming in their sleep to-night. But it’s quiet again now. I
think he has gone into the execution shed.”

“Yes. Well, I think there will be no more disturbance now. By the way,
please give me Mr Dawkins’s home address.”

       *       *       *       *       *

This was given him, and Dr Teesdale proceeded to write to the chaplain,
asking him to dine with him on the following night. But suddenly he
found that he could not write at his accustomed desk, with the telephone
standing close to him, and he went upstairs to the drawing-room which he
seldom used, except when he entertained his friends. There he recaptured
the serenity of his nerves, and could control his hand. The note simply
asked Mr Dawkins to dine with him next night, when he wished to tell him
a very strange history and ask his help. “Even if you have any other
engagement,” he concluded, “I seriously request you to give it up.
To-night, I did the same. I should bitterly have regretted it if I had
not.”

Next night accordingly, the two sat at their dinner in the doctor’s
dining-room, and when they were left to their cigarettes and coffee the
doctor spoke.

“You must not think me mad, my dear Dawkins,” he said, “when you hear
what I have got to tell you.”

Mr Dawkins laughed.

“I will certainly promise not to do that,” he said.

“Good. Last night and the night before, a little later in the evening
than this, I spoke through the telephone with the spirit of the man we
saw executed two days ago. Charles Linkworth.”

The chaplain did not laugh. He pushed back his chair, looking annoyed.

“Teesdale,” he said, “is it to tell me this--I don’t want to be
rude--but this bogey-tale that you have brought me here his evening?”

“Yes. You have not heard half of it. He asked me last night to get hold
of you. He wants to tell you something. We can guess, I think, what it
is.”

Dawkins got up.

“Please let me hear no more of it,” he said. “The dead do not return. In
what state or under what condition they exist has not been revealed to
us. But they have done with all material things.”

“But I must tell you more,” said the doctor. “Two nights ago I was rung
up, but very faintly, and could hear only whispers. I instantly inquired
where the call came from and was told it came from the prison. I rang
up the prison, and Warder Draycott told me that nobody had rung me up.
He, too, was conscious of a presence.”

“I think that man drinks,” said Dawkins, sharply.

The doctor paused a moment.

“My dear fellow, you should not say that sort of thing,” he said. “He is
one of the steadiest men we have got. And if he drinks, why not I also?”

The chaplain sat down again.

“You must forgive me,” he said, “but I can’t go into this. These are
dangerous matters to meddle with. Besides, how do you know it is not a
hoax?”

“Played by whom?” asked the doctor. “Hark!”

The telephone bell suddenly rang. It was clearly audible to the doctor.

“Don’t you hear it?” he said.

“Hear what?”

“The telephone bell ringing.”

“I hear no bell,” said the chaplain, rather angrily. “There is no bell
ringing.”

The doctor did not answer, but went through into his study, and turned
on the lights. Then he took the receiver and mouthpiece off its hook.

“Yes?” he said, in a voice that trembled. “Who is it? Yes: Mr Dawkins is
here. I will try and get him to speak to you.”

He went back into the other room.

“Dawkins,” he said, “there is a soul in agony. I pray you to listen.
For God’s sake come and listen.”

The chaplain hesitated a moment.

“As you will,” he said.

He took up the receiver and put it to his ear.

“I am Mr Dawkins,” he said.

He waited.

“I can hear nothing whatever,” he said at length. “Ah, there was
something there. The faintest whisper.”

“Ah, try to hear, try to hear!” said the doctor.

Again the chaplain listened. Suddenly he laid the instrument down,
frowning.

“Something--somebody said, ‘I killed her, I confess it. I want to be
forgiven.’ It’s a hoax, my dear Teesdale. Somebody knowing your
spiritualistic leanings is playing a very grim joke on you. I _can’t_
believe it.”

Dr Teesdale took up the receiver.

“I am Dr Teesdale,” he said. “Can you give Mr Dawkins some sign that it
is you?”

Then he laid it down again.

“He says he thinks he can,” he said. “We must wait.”

The evening was again very warm, and the window into the paved yard at
the back of the house was open. For five minutes or so the two men stood
in silence, waiting, and nothing happened. Then the chaplain spoke.

“I think that is sufficiently conclusive,” he said.

Even as he spoke a very cold draught of air suddenly blew into the room,
making the papers on the desk rustle. Dr Teesdale went to the window and
closed it.

“Did you feel that?” he asked.

“Yes, a breath of air. Chilly.”

Once again in the closed room it stirred again.

“And did you feel that?” asked the doctor.

The chaplain nodded. He felt his heart hammering in his throat suddenly.

“Defend us from all peril and danger of this coming night,” he
exclaimed.

“Something is coming!” said the doctor.

As he spoke it came. In the centre of the room not three yards away from
them stood the figure of a man with his head bent over on to his
shoulder, so that the face was not visible. Then he took his head in
both his hands and raised it like a weight, and looked them in the face.
The eyes and tongue protruded, a livid mark was round the neck. Then
there came a sharp rattle on the boards of the floor, and the figure was
no longer there. But on the floor there lay a new rope.

For a long while neither spoke. The sweat poured off the doctor’s face,
and the chaplain’s white lips whispered prayers. Then by a huge effort
the doctor pulled himself together. He pointed at the rope.

“It has been missing since the execution,” he said.

Then again the telephone bell rang. This time the chaplain needed no
prompting. He went to it at once and the ringing ceased. For a while he
listened in silence.

“Charles Linkworth,” he said at length, “in the sight of God, in whose
presence you stand, are you truly sorry for your sin?”

Some answer inaudible to the doctor came, and the chaplain closed his
eyes. And Dr Teesdale knelt as he heard the words of the Absolution.

At the close there was silence again.

“I can hear nothing more,” said the chaplain, replacing the receiver.

Presently the doctor’s man-servant came in with the tray of spirits and
syphon. Dr Teesdale pointed without looking to where the apparition had
been.

“Take the rope that is there and burn it, Parker,” he said.

There was a moment’s silence.

“There is no rope, sir,” said Parker.




AT ABDUL ALI’S GRAVE


Luxor, as most of those who have been there will allow, is a place of
notable charm, and boasts many attractions for the traveller, chief
among which he will reckon an excellent hotel containing a
billiard-room, a garden fit for the gods to sit in, any quantity of
visitors, at least a weekly dance on board a tourist steamer, quail
shooting, a climate as of Avilion, and a number of stupendously ancient
monuments for those archæologically inclined. But to certain others, few
indeed in number, but almost fanatically convinced of their own
orthodoxy, the charm of Luxor, like some sleeping beauty, only wakes
when these things cease, when the hotel has grown empty and the
billiard-marker “has gone for a long rest” to Cairo, when the decimated
quail and the decimating tourist have fled northwards, and the Theban
plain, Danæ to a tropical sun, is a gridiron across which no man would
willingly make a journey by day, not even if Queen Hatasoo herself
should signify that she would give him audience on the terraces of
Deir-el-Bahari. A suspicion however that the fanatic few were right, for
in other respects they were men of estimable opinions, induced me to
examine their convictions for myself, and thus it came about that two
years ago, certain days toward the beginning of June saw me still there,
a confirmed convert.

Much tobacco and the length of summer days had assisted us to the
analysis of the charm of which summer in the south is possessed, and
Weston--one of the earliest of the elect--and myself had discussed it at
some length, and though we reserved as the principal ingredient a
nameless something which baffled the chemist, and must be felt to be
understood, we were easily able to detect certain other drugs of sight
and sound, which we were agreed, contributed to the whole. A few of them
are here subjoined.

The waking in the warm darkness just before dawn to find that the desire
for stopping in bed fails with the awakening.

The silent start across the Nile in the still air with our horses, who,
like us, stand and sniff at the incredible sweetness of the coming
morning without apparently finding it less wonderful in repetition.

The moment infinitesimal in duration but infinite in sensation, just
before the sun rises, when the grey shrouded river is struck suddenly
out of darkness, and becomes a sheet of green bronze.

The rose flush, rapid as a change of colour in some chemical
combination, which shoots across the sky from east to west, followed
immediately by the sunlight which catches the peaks of the western
hills, and flows down like some luminous liquid.

The stir and whisper which goes through the world: a breeze springs up;
a lark soars and sings; the boatman shouts “Yallah. Yallah”; the horses
toss their heads.

The subsequent ride.

The subsequent breakfast on our return.

The subsequent absence of anything to do.

At sunset the ride into the desert thick with the scent of warm barren
sand, which smells like nothing else in the world, for it smells of
nothing at all.

The blaze of the tropical night.

Camel’s milk.

Converse with the fellahin, who are the most charming and least
accountable people on the face of the earth except when tourists are
about, and when in consequence there is no thought but backsheesh.

Lastly, and with this we are concerned, the possibility of odd
experiences.

       *       *       *       *       *

The beginning of the things which make this tale occurred four days ago,
when Abdul Ali, the oldest man in the village, died suddenly, full of
days and riches. Both, some thought, had probably been somewhat
exaggerated, but his relations affirmed without variation that he had as
many years as he had English pounds, and that each was a hundred. The
apt roundness of these numbers was incontestable, the thing was too
neat not to be true, and before he had been dead for twenty-four hours,
it was a matter of orthodoxy. But with regard to his relations, that
which turned their bereavement, which must soon have occurred, into a
source of blank dismay instead of pious resignation, was that not one of
these English pounds, not even their less satisfactory equivalent in
notes, which, out of the tourist season, are looked upon at Luxor as a
not very dependable variety of Philosopher’s stone, though certainly
capable of producing gold under favourable circumstances, could be
found. Abdul Ali with his hundred years was dead, his century of
sovereigns--they might as well have been an annuity--were dead with him,
and his son Mohamed, who had previously enjoyed a sort of brevet rank in
anticipation of the event, was considered to be throwing far more dust
in the air than the genuine affection even of a chief mourner wholly
justified.

Abdul, it is to be feared, was not a man of stereotyped respectability;
though full of years and riches, he enjoyed no great reputation for
honour. He drank wine whenever he could get it, he ate food during the
days of Ramadan, scornful of the fact, when his appetite desired it, he
was supposed to have the evil eye, and in his last moments he was
attended by the notorious Achmet, who is well known here to be practised
in Black Magic, and has been suspected of the much meaner crime of
robbing the bodies of those lately dead. For in Egypt, while to despoil
the bodies of ancient kings and priests is a privilege for which
advanced and learned societies vie with each other, to rob the corpses
of your contemporaries, is considered the deed of a dog. Mohamed who
soon exchanged the throwing of dust in the air for the more natural mode
of expressing chagrin, which is to gnaw the nails, told us in confidence
that he suspected Achmet of having ascertained the secret of where his
father’s money was, but it appeared that Achmet had as blank a face as
anybody when his patient, who was striving to make some communication to
him, went out into the great silence, and the suspicion that he knew
where the money was, gave way, in the minds of those who were competent
to form an estimate of his character, to a but dubious regret that he
had just failed to learn that very important fact.

So Abdul died and was buried, and we all went to the funeral feast at
which we ate more roast meat than one naturally cares about at five in
the afternoon on a June day, in consequence of which Weston and I, not
requiring dinner, stopped at home after our return from the ride into
the desert, and talked to Mohamed, Abdul’s son, and Hussein, Abdul’s
youngest grandson, a boy of about twenty, who is also our valet, cook
and housemaid, and they together woefully narrated of the money that had
been and was not, and told us scandalous tales about Achmet concerning
his weakness for cemeteries. They drank coffee and smoked, for though
Hussein was our servant, we had been that day the guests of his father,
and shortly after they had gone, up came Machmout.

Machmout, who says he thinks he is twelve, but does not know for
certain, is kitchen-maid, groom and gardener, and has to an
extraordinary degree some occult power resembling clairvoyance. Weston,
who is a member of the Society for Psychical Research, and the tragedy
of whose life has been the detection of the fraudulent medium Mrs Blunt,
says that it is all thought-reading, and has made notes of many of
Machmout’s performances, which may subsequently turn out to be of
interest. Thought-reading, however, does not seem to me to fully explain
the experience which followed Abdul’s funeral, and with Machmout I have
to put it down to White Magic, which should be a very inclusive term, or
to Pure Coincidence, which is even more inclusive, and will cover all
the inexplicable phenomena of the world, taken singly. Machmout’s method
of unloosing the forces of White Magic is simple, being the ink-mirror
known by name to many, and it is as follows.

A little black ink is poured into the palm of Machmout’s hand, or, as
ink has been at a premium lately owing to the last post-boat from Cairo
which contained stationery for us, having stuck on a sand-bank, a small
piece of black American cloth about an inch in diameter, is found to be
a perfect substitute. Upon this he gazes. After five or ten minutes his
shrewd monkey-like expression is struck from his face, his eyes, wide
open, remain fixed on the cloth, a complete rigidity sets in over his
muscles, and he tells us of the curious things he sees. In whatever
position he is, in that position he remains without the deflection of a
hair’s breadth until the ink is washed off or the cloth removed. Then he
looks up and says, “Khalás,” which means, “It is finished.”

We only engaged Machmout’s services as second general domestic a
fortnight ago, but the first evening he was with us he came upstairs
when he had finished his work, and said, “I will show you White Magic;
give me ink,” and proceeded to describe the front hall of our house in
London, saying that there were two horses at the door, and that a man
and woman soon came out, gave the horses each a piece of bread and
mounted. The thing was so probable that by the next mail I wrote asking
my mother to write down exactly what she was doing and where at half
past five (English time) on the evening of June 12. At the corresponding
time in Egypt Machmout was describing speaking to us of a “sitt” (lady)
having tea in a room which he described with some minuteness, and I am
waiting anxiously for her letter. The explanation which Weston gives us
of all these phenomena, is that a certain picture of people I know is
present in my mind, though I may not be aware of it,--present to my
subliminal self, I think, he says,--and that I give an unspoken
suggestion to the hypnotised Machmout. My explanation is that there
isn’t any explanation, for no suggestion on my part would make my
brother go out and ride at the moment when Machmout says he is so doing
(if indeed we find that Machmout’s visions are chronologically correct).
Consequently I prefer the open mind and am prepared to believe anything.
Weston, however, does not speak quite so calmly or scientifically about
Machmout’s last performance, and since it took place, he has almost
entirely ceased to urge me to become a member of the Society for
Psychical Research, in order that I may no longer be hidebound by vain
superstitions.

Machmout will not exercise these powers if his own folk are present, for
he says that when he is in this state, if a man who knew Black Magic was
in the room, or knew that he was practising White Magic, he could get
the spirit who presides over the Black Magic to kill the spirit of White
Magic, for the Black Magic is the more potent, and the two are foes. And
as the spirit of White Magic is on occasions a powerful friend--he had
before now befriended Machmout in a manner which I consider
incredible--Machmout is very desirous that he should abide long with
him. But Englishmen it appears do not know the Black Magic, so with us
he is safe. The spirit of Black Magic, to speak to whom it is death,
Machmout saw once “between heaven and earth, and night and day,” so he
phrases it, on the Karnak road. He may be known, he told us, by the fact
that he is of paler skin than his people, that he has two long teeth,
one in each corner of his mouth, and that his eyes, which are white all
over, are as big as the eyes of a horse.

Machmout squatted himself comfortably in the corner, and I gave him the
piece of black American cloth. As some minutes must elapse before he
gets into the hypnotic state in which the visions begin, I strolled out
on to the balcony for coolness. It was the hottest night we had yet had,
and though the sun had set three hours, the thermometer still registered
close on 100°. Above, the sky seemed veiled with grey, where it should
have been dark velvety blue, and a fitful puffing wind from the south
threatened three days of the sandy intolerable khamseen. A little way up
the street to the left was a small café in front of which were glowing
and waning little glowworm specks of light from the water pipes of Arabs
sitting out there in the dark. From inside came the click of brass
castanets in the hands of some dancing-girl, sounding sharp and precise
against the wailing bagpipe music of the strings and pipes which
accompany these movements which Arabs love and Europeans think so
unpleasing. Eastwards the sky was paler and luminous, for the moon was
imminently rising, and even as I looked the red rim of the enormous disc
cut the line of the desert, and on the instant with a curious aptness,
one of the Arabs outside the café broke out into that wonderful chant--

    “I cannot sleep for longing for thee, O full moon
     Far is thy throne over Mecca, slip down, O beloved, to me.”

Immediately afterwards I heard the piping monotone of Machmout’s voice
begin, and in a moment or two I went inside.

We have found that the experiments gave the quickest result by contact,
a fact which confirmed Weston in his explanation of them by thought
transference of some elaborate kind, which I confess I cannot
understand. He was writing at a table in the window when I came in, but
looked up.

“Take his hand,” he said, “at present he is quite incoherent.”

“Do you explain that?” I asked.

“It is closely analogous, so Myers thinks, to talking in sleep. He has
been saying something about a tomb. Do make a suggestion, and see if he
gives it right. He is remarkably sensitive and he responds quicker to
you than to me. Probably Abdul’s funeral suggested the tomb!”

A sudden thought struck me.

“Hush!” I said, “I want to listen.”

Machmout’s head was thrown a little back, and he held the hand in which
was the piece of cloth rather above his face. As usual he was talking
very slowly, and in a high staccato voice, absolutely unlike his usual
tones.

“On one side of the grave,” he piped, “is a tamarisk tree, and the green
beetles make _fantasia_ about it. On the other side is a mud wall. There
are many other graves about, but they are all asleep. This is _the_
grave, because it is awake, and is moist and not sandy.”

“I thought so,” said Weston, “It is Abdul’s grave he is talking about.”

“There is a red moon sitting on the desert,” continued Machmout, “and it
is now. There is the puffing of khamseen, and much dust coming. The moon
is red with dust, and because it is low.”

“Still sensitive to external conditions,” said Weston. “That is rather
curious. Pinch him, will you?”

I pinched Machmout; he did not pay the slightest attention.

“In the last house of the street, and in the doorway stands a man. Ah!
ah!” cried the boy suddenly, “it is the Black Magic he knows. Don’t let
him come. He is going out of the house,” he shrieked, “he is coming--no,
he is going the other way, towards the moon and the grave. He has the
Black Magic with him, which can raise the dead, and he has a murdering
knife, and a spade. I cannot see his face for the Black Magic is between
it and my eyes.”

Weston had got up, and, like me, was hanging on Machmout’s words.

“We will go there,” he said. “Here is an opportunity of testing it.
Listen a moment.”

“He is walking, walking, walking,” piped Machmout, “still walking to the
moon and the grave. The moon sits no longer on the desert, but has
sprung up a little way.”

I pointed out of the window.

“That at any rate is true,” I said.

Weston took the cloth out of Machmout’s hand, and the piping ceased. In
a moment he stretched himself, and rubbed his eyes.

“Khalás,” he said.

“Yes, it is Khalás.”

“Did I tell you of the sitt in England?” he asked.

“Yes, oh, yes,” I answered; “thank you, little Machmout. The White Magic
was very good to-night. Get you to bed.”

Machmout trotted obediently out of the room, and Weston closed the door
after him.

“We must be quick,” he said. “It is worth while going and giving the
thing a chance, though I wish he had seen something less gruesome. The
odd thing is that he was not at the funeral, and yet he describes the
grave accurately. What do you make of it?”

“I make that the White Magic has shown Machmout that somebody with
black magic is going to Abdul’s grave, perhaps to rob it,” I answered
resolutely.

“What are we to do when we get there?” asked Weston.

“See the Black Magic at work. Personally I am in a blue funk. So are
you.”

“There is no such thing as Black Magic,” said Weston. “Ah, I have it.
Give me that orange.”

Weston rapidly skinned it, and cut from the rind two circles as big as a
five shilling piece, and two long, white fangs of skin. The first he
fixed in his eye, the two latter in the corners of his mouth.

“The spirit of Black Magic?” I asked.

“The same.”

He took up a long black burnous and wrapped it round him. Even in the
bright lamp light, the spirit of black magic was a sufficiently terrific
personage.

“I don’t believe in black magic,” he said, “but others do. If it is
necessary to put a stop to--to anything that is going on, we will hoist
the man on his own petard. Come along. Whom do you suspect it is--I
mean, of course, who was the person you were thinking of when your
thoughts were transferred to Machmout.”

“What Machmout said,” I answered, “suggested Achmet to me.”

Weston indulged in a laugh of scientific incredulity, and we set off.

The moon, as the boy had told us, was just clear of the horizon, and as
it rose higher, its colour at first red and sombre, like the blaze of
some distant conflagration, paled to a tawny yellow. The hot wind from
the south, blowing no longer fitfully but with a steadily increasing
violence was thick with sand, and of an incredibly scorching heat, and
the tops of the palm trees in the garden of the deserted hotel on the
right were lashing themselves to and fro with a harsh rattle of dry
leaves. The cemetery lay on the outskirts of the village, and, as long
as our way lay between the mud walls of the huddling street, the wind
came to us only as the heat from behind closed furnace doors. Every now
and then with a whisper and whistle rising into a great buffeting flap,
a sudden whirlwind of dust would scour some twenty yards along the road,
and then break like a shore-quenched wave against one or other of the
mud walls or throw itself heavily against a house and fall in a shower
of sand. But once free of obstructions we were opposed to the full heat
and blast of the wind which blew full in our teeth. It was the first
summer khamseen of the year, and for the moment I wished I had gone
north with the tourist and the quail and the billiard marker, for
khamseen fetches the marrow out of the bones, and turns the body to
blotting paper. We passed no one in the street, and the only sound we
heard, except the wind, was the howling of moonstruck dogs.

The cemetery is surrounded by a tall mud-built wall, and sheltering for
a few moments under this we discussed our movements. The row of
tamarisks close to which the tomb lay went down the centre of the
graveyard, and by skirting the wall outside and climbing softly over
where they approached it, the fury of the wind might help us to get near
the grave without being seen, if anyone happened to be there. We had
just decided on this, and were moving on to put the scheme into
execution, when the wind dropped for a moment, and in the silence we
could hear the chump of the spade being driven into the earth, and what
gave me a sudden thrill of intimate horror, the cry of the
carrion-feeding hawk from the dusty sky just overhead.

Two minutes later we were creeping up in the shade of the tamarisks, to
where Abdul had been buried. The great green beetles which live on the
trees were flying about blindly, and once or twice one dashed into my
face with a whirr of mail-clad wings. When we were within some twenty
yards of the grave we stopped for a moment, and, looking cautiously out
from our shelter of tamarisks, saw the figure of a man already waist
deep in the earth, digging out the newly turned grave. Weston, who was
standing behind me had adjusted the characteristics of the spirit of
Black Magic so as to be ready for emergencies, and turning round
suddenly, and finding myself unawares face to face with that realistic
impersonation, though my nerves are not precariously strong, I could
have found it within me to shriek aloud. But that unsympathetic man of
iron only shook with suppressed laughter, and, holding the eyes in his
hand, motioned me forward again without speaking to where the trees grew
thicker. There we stood not a dozen yards away from the grave.

We waited, I suppose, for some ten minutes, while the man, whom we saw
to be Achmet, toiled on at his impious task. He was entirely naked, and
his brown skin glistened with the dews of exertion in the moonlight. At
times he chattered in a cold uncanny manner to himself, and once or
twice he stopped for breath. Then he began scraping the earth away with
his hands, and soon afterwards searched in his clothes which were lying
near for a piece of rope, with which he stepped into the grave, and in a
moment reappeared again with both ends in his hands. Then, standing
astride the grave, he pulled strongly, and one end of the coffin
appeared above the ground. He chipped a piece of the lid away to make
sure that he had the right end, and then, setting it upright, wrenched
off the top with his knife and there faced us leaning against the coffin
lid, the small shrivelled figure of the dead Abdul, swathed like a baby
in white.

I was just about to motion the spirit of Black Magic to make his
appearance, when Machmout’s words came into my head: “He has with him
the Black Magic which can raise the dead,” and sudden overwhelming
curiosity, which froze disgust and horror into chill unfeeling things,
came over me.

“Wait,” I whispered to Weston, “he will use the Black Magic.”

Again the wind dropped for a moment, and again, in the silence that came
with it, I heard the chiding of the hawk overhead, this time nearer, and
thought I heard more birds than one.

Achmet meantime had taken the covering from off the face, and had undone
the swathing band, which at the moment after death is bound round the
chin to close the jaw, and in Arab burial is always left there, and from
where we stood I could see that the jaw dropped when the bandage was
untied, as if, though the wind blew towards us with a ghastly scent of
mortality on it, the muscles were not even now set, though the man had
been dead sixty hours. But still a rank and burning curiosity to see
what this unclean ghoul would do next stifled all other feelings in my
mind. He seemed not to notice, or, at any rate, to disregard that mouth
gaping awry, and moved about nimbly in the moonlight.

He took from a pocket of his clothes, which were lying near, two small
black objects, which now are safely embedded in the mud at the bottom of
the Nile, and rubbed them briskly together. By degrees they grew
luminous with a sickly yellow pallor of light, and from his hands went
up a wavy, phosphorescent flame. One of these cubes he placed in the
open mouth of the corpse, the other in his own, and, taking the dead man
closely in his arms as though he would indeed dance with death, he
breathed long breaths from his mouth into that dead cavern which was
pressed to his. Suddenly he started back with a quick-drawn breath of
wonder and perhaps of horror, and stood for a space as if irresolute,
for the cube which the dead man held instead of lying loosely in the
jaw, was pressed tight between clenched teeth. After a moment of
irresolution he stepped back quickly to his clothes again, and took up
from near them the knife with which he had stripped off the coffin lid,
and holding this in one hand behind his back, with the other he took out
the cube from the dead man’s mouth, though with a visible exhibition of
force, and spoke.

“Abdul,” he said, “I am your friend, and I swear I will give your money
to Mohamed, if you will tell me where it is.”

Certain I am that the lips of the dead moved, and the eyelids fluttered
for a moment like the wings of a wounded bird, but at that sight, the
horror so grew on me that I was physically incapable of stifling the cry
that rose to my lips, and Achmet turned round. Next moment the complete
Spirit of Black Magic glided out of the shade of the trees, and stood
before him. The wretched man stood for a moment without stirring, then,
turning with shaking knees to flee, he stepped back and fell into the
grave he had just opened.

Weston turned on me angrily, dropping the eyes and the teeth of the
Afrit.

“You spoiled it all,” he cried. “It would perhaps have been the most
interesting ...” and his eye lighted on the dead Abdul, who peered
open-eyed from the coffin, then swayed, tottered, and fell forward, face
downwards on the ground close to him. For one moment he lay there, and
then the body rolled slowly on to its back without visible cause of
movement, and lay staring into the sky. The face was covered with dust,
but with the dust was mingled fresh blood. A nail had caught the cloth
that wound him, underneath which as usual were the clothes in which he
had died, for the Arabs do not wash their dead, and it had torn a great
rent through them all, leaving the right shoulder bare.

Weston strove to speak once, but failed. Then:

“I will go and inform the police,” he said, “if you will stop here, and
see that Achmet does not get out.”

But this I altogether refused to do, and, after covering the body with
the coffin to protect it from the hawks, we secured Achmet’s arms with
the rope he had already used that night, and took him off to Luxor.

Next morning Mohamed came to see us.

“I thought Achmet knew where the money was,” he said exultantly.

“Where was it?”

“In a little purse tied round the shoulder. The dog had already begun
stripping it. See”--and he brought it out of his pocket--“it is all
there in those English notes, five pounds each, and there are twenty of
them.”

Our conclusion was slightly different, for even Weston will allow that
Achmet _hoped_ to learn from dead lips the secret of the treasure, and
then to kill the man anew and bury him. But that is pure conjecture.

The only other point of interest lies in the two black cubes which we
picked up, and found to be graven with curious characters. These I put
one evening into Machmout’s hand, when he was exhibiting to us his
curious powers of “thought transference.” The effect was that he
screamed aloud, crying out that the Black Magic had come, and though I
did not feel certain about that, I thought they would be safer in
mid-Nile. Weston grumbled a little, and said that he had wanted to take
them to the British Museum, but that I feel sure was an afterthought.




THE SHOOTINGS OF ACHNALEISH


The dining-room windows, both front and back, the one looking into
Oakley Street, the other into a small back-yard with three sooty shrubs
in it (known as the garden), were all open, so that the table stood in
mid-stream of such air as there was. But in spite of this the heat was
stifling, since, for once in a way, July had remembered that it was the
duty of good little summers to be hot. Hot in consequence it had been:
heat reverberated from the house-walls, it rose through the boot from
the paving-stones, it poured down from a large superheated sun that
walked the sky all day long in a benignant and golden manner. Dinner was
over, but the small party of four who had eaten it still lingered.

Mabel Armytage--it was she who had laid down the duty of good little
summers--spoke first.

“Oh, Jim, it sounds too heavenly,” she said. “It makes me feel cool to
think of it. Just fancy, in a fortnight’s time we shall all four of us
be there, in our own shooting-lodge----”

“Farm-house,” said Jim.

“Well, I didn’t suppose it was Balmoral, with our own coffee-coloured
salmon river roaring down to join the waters of our own loch.”

Jim lit a cigarette.

“Mabel, you mustn’t think of shooting-lodges and salmon rivers and
lochs,” he said. “It’s a farm-house, rather a big one, though I’m sure
we shall find it hard enough to fit in. The salmon river you speak of is
a big burn, no more, though it appears that salmon have been caught
there. But when I saw it, it would have required as much cleverness on
the part of a salmon to fit into it as it will require on our parts to
fit into our farm-house. And the loch is a tarn.”

Mabel snatched the “Guide to Highland Shootings” out of my hand with a
rudeness that even a sister should not show her elder brother, and
pointed a withering finger at her husband.

“‘Achnaleish,’” she declaimed, “‘is situated in one of the grandest and
most remote parts of Sutherlandshire. To be let from August 12 till the
end of October, the lodge with shooting and fishing belonging.
Proprietor supplies two keepers, fishing-gillie, boat on loch, and dogs.
Tenant should secure about 500 head of grouse and 500 head of mixed
game, including partridge, black-game, woodcock, snipe, roe deer; also
rabbits in very large number, especially by ferreting. Large baskets of
brown trout can be taken from the loch, and whenever the water is high
sea-trout and occasional salmon. Lodge contains’--I can’t go on; it’s
too hot, and you know the rest. Rent only £350!”

Jim listened patiently.

“Well?” he said. “What then?”

Mabel rose with dignity.

“It _is_ a shooting-lodge with a salmon river and a loch, just as I have
said. Come, Madge, let’s go out. It is too hot to sit in the house.”

“You’ll be calling Buxton ‘the major-domo’ next,” remarked Jim, as his
wife passed him.

I had picked up the “Guide to Highland Shootings” again which my sister
had so unceremoniously plucked from me, and idly compared the rent and
attractions of Achnaleish with other places that were to let.

“Seems cheap, too,” I said. “Why, here’s another place, just the same
sort of size and bag, for which they ask £500; here’s another at £550.”

Jim helped himself to coffee.

“Yes, it does seem cheap,” he said. “But, of course, it’s very remote:
it took me a good three hours from Lairg, and I don’t suppose I was
driving very noticeably below the legal limit. But it’s cheap, as you
say.”

Now, Madge (who is my wife) has her prejudices. One of them--an
extremely expensive one--is that anything cheap has always some hidden
and subtle drawback, which you discover when it is too late. And the
drawback to cheap houses is drains or offices--the presence, so to
speak, of the former, and the absence of the latter. So I hazarded
these.

“No, the drains are all right,” said Jim, “because I got the certificate
of the inspector, and as for offices, really I think the servants’ parts
are better than ours. No--why it’s so cheap, I can’t imagine.”

“Perhaps the bag is overstated,” I suggested.

Jim again shook his head.

“No, that’s the funny thing about it,” he said. “The bag, I am sure, is
understated. At least, I walked over the moor for a couple of hours, and
the whole place is simply crawling with hares. Why, you could shoot five
hundred hares alone on it.”

“Hares?” I asked. “That’s rather queer, so far up, isn’t it?”

Jim laughed.

“So I thought. And the hares are queer, too; big beasts, very dark in
colour. Let’s join the others outside. Jove! what a hot night!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Even as Mabel had said, that day fortnight found us all four, the four
who had stifled and sweltered in Chelsea, flying through the cool and
invigorating winds of the North. The road was in admirable condition,
and I should not wonder if for the second time Jim’s big Napier went not
noticeably below the legal limit. The servants had gone straight up,
starting the same day as we, while we had got out at Perth, motored to
Inverness, and were now, on the second day, nearing our goal. Never
have I seen so depopulated a road. I do not suppose there was a man to a
mile of it.

We had left Lairg about five that afternoon, expecting to arrive at
Achnaleish by eight, but one disaster after another overtook us. Now it
was the engine, and now a tyre that delayed us, till finally we stopped
some eight miles short of our destination, to light up, for with evening
had come a huge wrack of cloud out of the West, so that we were cheated
of the clear post-sunset twilight of the North. Then on again, till,
with a little dancing of the car over a bridge, Jim said:

“That’s the bridge of our salmon river; so look out for the turning up
to the lodge. It is to the right, and only a narrow track. You can send
her along, Sefton,” he called to the chauffeur; “we shan’t meet a soul.”

I was sitting in front, finding the speed and the darkness
extraordinarily exhilarating. A bright circle of light was cast by our
lamps, fading into darkness in front, while at the sides, cut off by the
casing of the lamps, the transition into blackness was sharp and sudden.
Every now and then, across this circle of illumination some wild thing
would pass: now a bird, with hurried flutter of wings when it saw the
speed of the luminous monster, would just save itself from being knocked
over; now a rabbit feeding by the side of the road would dash onto it
and then bounce back again; but more frequently it would be a hare that
sprang up from its feeding and raced in front of us. They seemed dazed
and scared by the light, unable to wheel into the darkness again, until
time and again I thought we must run over one, so narrowly, in giving a
sort of desperate sideways leap, did it miss our wheels. Then it seemed
that one started up almost from under us, and I saw, to my surprise, it
was enormous in size, and in colour apparently quite black. For some
hundred yards it raced in front of us, fascinated by the bright light
pursuing it, then, like the rest, it dashed for the darkness. But it was
too late, and with a horrid jolt we ran over it. At once Sefton slowed
down and stopped, for Jim’s rule is to go back always and make sure that
any poor run-over is dead. So, when we stopped, the chauffeur jumped
down and ran back.

“What was it?” Jim asked me, as we waited.

“A hare.”

Sefton came running back.

“Yes, sir, quite dead,” he said. “I picked it up, sir.”

“What for?”

“Thought you might like to see it, sir. It’s the biggest hare I ever
see, and it’s quite black.”

It was immediately after this that we came to the track up to the house,
and in a few minutes we were within doors. There we found that if
“shooting-lodge” was a term unsuitable, so also was “farmhouse,” so
roomy, excellently proportioned, and well furnished was our dwelling,
while the contentment that beamed from Buxton’s face was sufficient
testimonial for the offices. In the hall, too, with its big open
fireplace, were a couple of big solemn bookcases, full of serious works,
such as some educated minister might have left, and, coming down dressed
for dinner before the others, I dipped into the shelves. Then--something
must long have been vaguely simmering in my brain, for I pounced on the
book as soon as I saw it--I came upon Elwes’s “Folklore of the North
West Highlands,” and looked out “Hare” in the index. Then I read:

“Nor is it only witches that are believed to have the power of changing
themselves into animals.... Men and women on whom no suspicion of the
sort lies are thought to be able to do this, and to don the bodies of
certain animals, notably hares.... Such, according to local
superstition, are easily distinguishable by their size and colour, which
approaches jet black.”

I was up and out early next morning, prey to the vivid desire that
attacks many folk in new places--namely, to look on the fresh country
and the new horizons--and, on going out, certainly the surprise was
great. For I had imagined an utterly lonely and solitary habitation;
instead, scarce half a mile away, down the steep brae-side at the top of
which stood our commodious farm-house, ran a typically Scotch village
street, the hamlet no doubt of Achnaleish. So steep was this hill-side
that the village was really remote; if it was half a mile away in
crow-flying measurement, it must have been a couple of hundred yards
below us. But its existence was the odd thing to me: there were some
four dozen houses, at the least, while we had not seen half that number
since leaving Lairg. A mile away, perhaps, lay the shining shield of the
western sea; to the other side, away from the village, I had no
difficulty in recognising the river and the loch. The house, in fact,
was set on a hog’s back; from all sides it must needs be climbed to.
But, as is the custom of the Scots, no house, however small, should be
without its due brightness of flowers, and the walls of this were purple
with clematis and orange with tropæolum. It all looked very placid and
serene and home-like.

I continued my tour of exploration, and came back rather late for
breakfast. A slight check in the day’s arrangements had occurred, for
the head keeper, Maclaren, had not come up, and the second, Sandie Ross,
reported that the reason for this had been the sudden death of his
mother the evening before. She was not known to be ill, but just as she
was going to bed she had thrown up her arms, screamed suddenly as if
with fright, and was found to be dead. Sandie, who repeated this news to
me after breakfast, was just a slow, polite Scotchman, rather shy,
rather awkward. Just as he finished--we were standing about outside the
back-door--there came up from the stables the smart, very
English-looking Sefton. In one hand he carried the black hare.

He touched his hat to me as he went in.

“Just to show it to Mr Armytage, sir,” he said. “She’s as black as a
boot.”

He turned into the door, but not before Sandie Ross had seen what he
carried, and the slow, polite Scotchman was instantly turned into some
furtive, frightened-looking man.

“And where might it be that you found that, sir?” he asked.

Now, the black-hare superstition had already begun to intrigue me.

“Why does that interest you?” I asked.

The slow Scotch look was resumed with an effort.

“It’ll no interest me,” he said. “I just asked. There are unco many
black hares in Achnaleish.”

Then his curiosity got the better of him.

“She’d have been nigh to where the road passes by and on to Achnaleish?”
he asked.

“The hare? Yes, we found her on the road there.”

Sandie turned away.

“She aye sat there,” he said.

There were a number of little plantations climbing up the steep
hill-side from Achnaleish to the moor above, and we had a pleasant slack
sort of morning shooting there, walking through and round them with a
nondescript tribe of beaters, among whom the serious Buxton figured. We
had fair enough sport, but of the hares which Jim had seen in such
profusion none that morning came to the gun, till at last, just before
lunch, there came out of the apex of one of these plantations, some
thirty yards from where Jim was standing, a very large, dark-coloured
hare. For one moment I saw him hesitate--for he holds the correct view
about long or doubtful shots at hares--then he put up his gun to fire.
Sandie, who had walked round outside, after giving the beaters their
instructions, was at this moment close to him, and with incredible
quickness rushed upon him and with his stick struck up the barrels of
the gun before he could fire.

“Black hare!” he cried. “Ye’d shoot a black hare? There’s no shooting of
hares at all in Achnaleish, and mark that.”

Never have I seen so sudden and extraordinary a change in a man’s face:
it was as if he had just prevented some blackguard of the street from
murdering his wife.

“An’ the sickness about an’ all,” he added indignantly. “When the puir
folk escape from their peching fevered bodies an hour or two, to the
caller muirs.”

Then he seemed to recover himself.

“I ask your pardon, sir,” he said to Jim. “I was upset with ane thing
an’ anither, an’ the black hare ye found deid last night--eh, I’m
blatherin’ again. But there’s no a hare shot on Achnaleish, that’s
sure.”

Jim was still looking in mere speechless astonishment at Sandie when I
came up. And, though shooting is dear to me, so too is folk-lore.

“But we’ve taken the shooting of Achnaleish, Sandie,” I said. “There was
nothing there about not shooting hares.”

Sandie suddenly boiled up again for a minute.

“An’ mebbe there was nothing there about shooting the bairns and the
weemen!” he cried.

I looked round, and saw that by now the beaters had all come through the
wood: of them Buxton and Jim’s valet, who was also among them, stood
apart: all the rest were standing round us two with gleaming eyes and
open mouths, hanging on the debate, and forced, so I imagined, from
their imperfect knowledge of English to attend closely in order to catch
the drift of what went on. Every now and then a murmur of Gaelic passed
between them, and this somehow I found peculiarly disconcerting.

“But what have the hares to do with the children or women of
Achnaleish?” I asked.

There was no reply to this beyond the reiterated sentence: “There’s na
shooting of hares in Achnaleish whatever,” and then Sandie turned to
Jim.

“That’s the end of the bit wood, sir,” he said. “We’ve been a’ roound.”

Certainly the beat had been very satisfactory. A roe had fallen to Jim
(one ought also to have fallen to me, but remained, if not standing, at
any rate running away). We had a dozen of black-game, four pigeons, six
brace of grouse (these were, of course, but outliers, as we had not gone
on to the moor proper at all), some thirty rabbits, and four couple of
woodcock. This, it must be understood, was just from the fringe of
plantations about the house, but this was all we meant to do to-day,
making only a morning of it, since our ladies had expressly desired
first lessons in the art of angling in the afternoon, so that they too
could be busy. Excellently too had Sandie worked the beat, leaving us
now, after going, as he said, all round, a couple of hundred yards only
from the house, at a few minutes to two.

So, after a little private signalling from Jim to me, he spoke to
Sandie, dropping the hare-question altogether.

“Well, the beat has gone excellently,” he said, “and this afternoon
we’ll be fishing. Please settle with the beaters every evening, and tell
me what you have paid out. Good morning to you all.”

We walked back to the house, but the moment we had turned a hum of
confabulation began behind us, and, looking back, I saw Sandie and all
the beaters in close whispering conclave. Then Jim spoke.

“More in your line than mine,” he said; “I prefer shooting a hare to
routing out some cock-and-bull story as to why I shouldn’t. What does it
all mean?”

I mentioned what I had found in Elwes last night.

“Then do they think it was we who killed the old lady on the road, and
that I was going to kill somebody else this morning?” he asked. “How
does one know that they won’t say that rabbits are their aunts, and
woodcock their uncles, and grouse their children? I never heard such
rot, and to-morrow we’ll have a hare drive. Blow the grouse! We’ll
settle this hare-question first.”

Jim by this time was in the frame of mind typical of the English when
their rights are threatened. He had the shooting of Achnaleish, on which
were hares, sir, hares. And if he chose to shoot hares, neither papal
bull nor royal charter could stop him.

“Then there’ll be a row,” said I, and Jim sniffed scornfully.

At lunch Sandie’s remark about the “sickness,” which I had forgotten
till that moment, was explained.

“Fancy that horrible influenza getting here,” said Madge. “Mabel and I
went down to the village this morning, and, oh, Ted, you can get all
sorts of things, from mackintoshes to peppermints, at the most heavenly
shop, and there was a child there looking awfully ill and feverish. So
we inquired: it was the ‘sickness’--that was all they knew. But, from
what the woman said, it’s clearly influenza. Sudden fever, and all the
rest of it.”

“Bad type?” I asked.

“Yes; there have been several deaths already among the old people from
pneumonia following it.”

Now, I hope that as an Englishman I too have a notion of my rights, and
attempt anyhow to enforce them, as a general rule, if they are wantonly
threatened. But if a mad bull wishes to prevent my going across a
certain field, I do not insist on my rights, but go round instead, since
I see no reasonable hope of convincing the bull that according to the
constitution of my country I may walk in this field unmolested. And that
afternoon, as Madge and I drifted about the loch, while I was not
employed in disentangling her flies from each other or her hair or my
coat, I pondered over our position with regard to the hares and men of
Achnaleish, and thought that the question of the bull and the field
represented our standpoint pretty accurately. Jim _had_ the shooting of
Achnaleish, and that undoubtedly included the right to shoot hares: so
too he might have the right to walk over a field in which was a mad
bull. But it seemed to me not more futile to argue with the bull than to
hope to convince these folk of Achnaleish that the hares were--as was
assuredly the case--only hares, and not the embodiments of their
friends and relations. For that, beyond all doubt, was their belief, and
it would take, not half an hour’s talk, but perhaps a couple of
generations of education to kill that belief, or even to reduce it to
the level of a superstition. At present it was no superstition--the
terror and incredulous horror on Sandie’s face when Jim raised his gun
to fire at the hare told me that--it was a belief as sober and
commonplace as our own belief that the hares were not incarnations of
living folk in Achnaleish. Also, virulent influenza was raging in the
place, and Jim proposed to have a hare-drive to-morrow! What would
happen?

That evening Jim raved about it in the smoking-room.

“But, good gracious, man, what can they _do_?” he cried. “What’s the use
of an old gaffer from Achnaleish saying I’ve shot his grand-daughter
and, when he is asked to produce the corpse, telling the jury that we’ve
eaten it, but that he has got the skin as evidence? What skin? A
hare-skin! Oh, folk-lore is all very well in its way, a nice subject for
discussion when topics are scarce, but don’t tell me it can enter into
practical life. What can they do?”

“They can shoot us,” I remarked.

“The canny, God-fearing Scotchmen shoot us for shooting hares?” he
asked.

“Well, it’s a possibility. However, I don’t think you’ll have much of a
hare-drive in any case.”

“Why not?”

“Because you won’t get a single native beater, and you won’t get a
keeper to come either. You’ll have to go with Buxton and your man.”

“Then I’ll discharge Sandie,” snapped Jim.

“That would be a pity: he knows his work.”

Jim got up.

“Well, his work to-morrow will be to drive hares for you and me,” said
Jim. “Or do you funk?”

“I funk,” I replied.

The scene next morning was extremely short. Jim and I went out before
breakfast, and found Sandie at the back door, silent and respectful. In
the yard were a dozen young Highlanders, who had beaten for us the day
before.

“Morning, Sandie,” said Jim shortly. “We’ll drive hares to-day. We ought
to get a lot in those narrow gorges up above. Get a dozen beaters more,
can you?”

“There will be na hare-drive here,” said Sandie quietly.

“I have given you your orders,” said Jim.

Sandie turned to the group of beaters outside and spoke half a dozen
words in Gaelic. Next moment the yard was empty, and they were all
running down the hillside towards Achnaleish. One stood on the skyline a
moment, waving his arms, making some signal, as I supposed, to the
village below. Then Sandie turned again.

“An’ whaur are your beaters, sir?” he asked.

For the moment I was afraid Jim was going to strike him. But he
controlled himself.

“You are discharged,” he said.

The hare-drive, therefore, since there were neither beaters nor
keeper--Maclaren, the head-keeper, having been given this “day-off” to
bury his mother--was clearly out of the question, and Jim, still
blustering rather, but a good bit taken aback at the sudden disciplined
defection of the beaters, was in betting humour that they would all
return by to-morrow morning. Meanwhile the post which should have
arrived before now had not come, though Mabel from her bedroom window
had seen the post-cart on its way up the drive a quarter of an hour ago.
At that a sudden idea struck me, and I ran to the edge of the hog’s back
on which the house was set. It was even as I thought: the post-cart was
just striking the high-road below, going away from the house and back to
the village, without having left our letters.

I went back to the dining-room. Everything apparently was going wrong
this morning: the bread was stale, the milk was not fresh, and the bell
was rung for Buxton. Quite so: neither milkman nor baker had called.

From the point of view of folk-lore this was admirable.

“There’s another cock-and-bull story called ‘taboo,’” I said. “It means
that nobody will supply you with anything.”

“My dear fellow, a little knowledge is a dangerous thing,” said Jim,
helping himself to marmalade.

I laughed.

“You are irritated,” I said, “because you are beginning to be afraid
that there is something in it.”

“Yes, that’s quite true,” he said. “But who could have supposed there
was anything in it? Ah, dash it! there _can’t_ be. A hare is a hare.”

“Except when it is your first cousin,” said I.

“Then I shall go out and shoot first cousins by myself,” he said.

That, I am glad to say, in the light of what followed, we dissuaded him
from doing, and instead he went off with Madge down the burn. And I, I
may confess, occupied myself the whole morning, ensconced in a thick
piece of scrub on the edge of the steep brae above Achnaleish, in
watching through a field-glass what went on there. One could see as from
a balloon almost: the street with its houses was spread like a map
below.

First, then, there was a funeral--the funeral, I suppose, of the mother
of Maclaren, attended, I should say, by the whole village. But after
that there was no dispersal of the folk to their work: it was as if it
was the Sabbath; they hung about the street talking. Now one group would
break up, but it would only go to swell another, and no one went either
to his house or to the fields. Then, shortly before lunch, another idea
occurred to me, and I ran down the hill-side, appearing suddenly in the
street, to put it to the test. Sandie was there, but he turned his back
square on me, as did everybody else, and as I approached any group talk
fell dead. But a certain movement seemed to be going on; where they
stood and talked before, they now moved and were silent. Soon I saw what
that meant. None would remain in the street with me: every man was going
to his house.

The end house of the street was clearly the “heavenly shop” we had been
told of yesterday. The door was open and a small child was looking round
it as I approached, for my plan was to go in, order something, and try
to get into conversation. But, while I was still a yard or two off, I
saw through the glass of the door a man inside come quickly up and pull
the child roughly away, banging the door and locking it. I knocked and
rang, but there was no response: only from inside came the crying of the
child.

The street which had been so busy and populous was now completely empty;
it might have been the street of some long-deserted place, but that thin
smoke curled here and there above the houses. It was as silent, too, as
the grave, but, for all that, I knew it was watching. From every house,
I felt sure, I was being watched by eyes of mistrust and hate, yet no
sign of living being could I see. There was to me something rather eerie
about this: to know one is watched by invisible eyes is never, I
suppose, quite a comfortable sensation; to know that those eyes are all
hostile does not increase the sense of security. So I just climbed back
up the hill-side again, and from my thicket above the brae again I
peered down. Once more the street was full.

Now, all this made me uneasy: the taboo had been started, and--since not
a soul had been near us since Sandie gave the word, whatever it was,
that morning--was in excellent working order. Then what was the purport
of these meetings and colloquies? What else threatened? The afternoon
told me.

It was about two o’clock when these meetings finally broke up, and at
once the whole village left the street for the hill-sides, much as if
they were all returning to work. The only odd thing indeed was that no
one remained behind: women and children alike went out, all in little
parties of two and three. Some of these I watched rather idly, for I had
formed the hasty conclusion that they were all going back to their usual
employments, and saw that here a woman and girl were cutting dead
bracken and heather. That was reasonable enough, and I turned my glass
on others. Group after group I examined; all were doing the same thing,
cutting fuel ... fuel.

Then vaguely, with a sense of impossibility, a thought flashed across
me; again it flashed, more vividly. This time I left my hiding-place
with considerable alacrity and went to find Jim down by the burn. I told
him exactly what I had seen and what I believed it meant, and I fancy
that his belief in the possibility of folk-lore entering the domain of
practical life was very considerably quickened. In any case, it was not
a quarter of an hour afterwards that the chauffeur and I were going,
precisely as fast as the Napier was able, along the road to Lairg. We
had not told the women what my conjecture was, because we believed that,
making the dispositions we were making, there was no cause for
alarm-sounding. One private signal only existed between Jim within the
house that night and me outside. If my conjecture proved to be correct,
he was to place a light in the window of my room, which I should see
returning after dark from Lairg. My ostensible reason for going was to
get some local fishing-flies.

As we flowed--there is no other word for the movement of these big cars
but that--over the road to Lairg, I ran over everything in my mind. I
felt no doubt whatever that all the brushwood and kindling I had seen
being gathered in was to be piled after nightfall round our walls and
set on fire. This certainly would not be done till after dark; indeed,
we both felt sure that it would not be done till it was supposed that we
were all abed. It remained to see whether the police at Lairg agreed
with my conjecture, and it was to ascertain this that I was now flowing
there.

I told my story to the chief constable as soon as I got there, omitting
nothing and, I think, exaggerating nothing. His face got graver and
graver as I proceeded.

“Yes, sir, you did right to come,” he said. “The folk at Achnaleish are
the dourest and the most savage in all Scotland. You’ll have to give up
this hare-hunting, though, whatever,” he added.

He rang up his telephone.

“I’ll get five men,” he said, “and I’ll be with you in ten minutes.”

Our plan of campaign was simple. We were to leave the car well out of
sight of Achnaleish, and--supposing the signal was in my window--steal
up from all sides to command the house from every direction. It would
not be difficult to make our way unseen through the plantations that ran
up close to the house, and hidden at their margins we could see whether
the brushwood and heather was piled up round the lodge. There we should
wait to see if anybody attempted to fire it. That somebody, whenever he
showed his light, would be instantly covered by a rifle and challenged.

It was about ten when we dismounted and stalked our way up to the house.
The light burned in my window; all else was quiet. Personally, I was
unarmed, and so, when I had planted the men in places of advantageous
concealment round the house, my work was over. Then I returned to
Sergeant Duncan, the chief constable, at the corner of the hedge by the
garden, and waited.

How long we waited I do not know, but it seemed as if æons slipped by
over us. Now and then an owl would hoot, now and then a rabbit ran out
from cover and nibbled the short sweet grass of the lawn. The night was
thickly overcast with clouds, and the house seemed no more than a black
blot, with slits of light where windows were lit within. By and by even
these slits of illumination were extinguished, and other lights appeared
in the top story. After a while they, too, vanished; no sign of life
appeared on the quiet house. Then suddenly the end came: I heard a foot
grate on the gravel; I saw the gleam of a lantern, and heard Duncan’s
voice.

“Man,” he shouted, “if you move hand or foot I fire. My rifle-bead is
dead on you.”

Then I blew the whistle; the others ran up, and in less than a minute it
was all over. The man we closed in on was Maclaren.

“They killed my mither with that hell-carriage,” he said, “as she juist
sat on the road, puir body, who had niver hurt them.”

And that seemed to him an excellent reason for attempting to burn us all
to death.

But it took time to get into the house: their preparations had been
singularly workmanlike, for every window and door on the ground floor
was wired up.

Now, we had Achnaleish for two months, but we had no wish to be burned
or otherwise murdered. What we wanted was not a prosecution of our
head-keeper, but peace, the necessaries of life, and beaters. For that
we were willing to shoot no hares, and release Maclaren. An hour’s
conclave next morning settled these things; the ensuing two months were
most enjoyable, and relations were the friendliest.

But if anybody wants to test how far what Jim still calls cock-and-bull
stories can enter into practical life, I should suggest to him to go
a-shooting hares at Achnaleish.




HOW FEAR DEPARTED FROM THE LONG GALLERY


CHURCH-PEVERIL is a house so beset and frequented by spectres, both
visible and audible, that none of the family which it shelters under its
acre and a half of green copper roofs takes psychical phenomena with any
seriousness. For to the Peverils the appearance of a ghost is a matter
of hardly greater significance than is the appearance of the post to
those who live in more ordinary houses. It arrives, that is to say,
practically every day, it knocks (or makes other noises), it is observed
coming up the drive (or in other places). I myself, when staying there
have seen the present Mrs Peveril, who is rather short-sighted, peer
into the dusk, while we were taking our coffee on the terrace after
dinner, and say to her daughter:

“My dear, was not that the Blue Lady who has just gone into the
shrubbery. I hope she won’t frighten Flo. Whistle for Flo, dear.”

(Flo, it may be remarked, is the youngest and most precious of many
dachshunds).

Blanche Peveril gave a cursory whistle, and crunched the sugar left
unmelted at the bottom of her coffee-cup between her very white teeth.

“Oh, darling, Flo isn’t so silly as to mind,” she said. “Poor blue Aunt
Barbara is such a bore! Whenever I meet her she always looks as if she
wanted to speak to me, but when I say, ‘What is it, Aunt Barbara?’ she
never utters, but only points somewhere towards the house, which is so
vague. I believe there was something she wanted to confess about two
hundred years ago, but she has forgotten what it is.”

Here Flo gave two or three short pleased barks, and came out of the
shrubbery wagging her tail, and capering round what appeared to me to be
a perfectly empty space on the lawn.

“There! Flo has made friends with her,” said Mrs Peveril. “I wonder why
she dresses in that very stupid shade of blue.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From this it may be gathered that even with regard to psychical
phenomena there is some truth in the proverb that speaks of familiarity.
But the Peverils do not exactly treat their ghosts with contempt, since
most of that delightful family never despised anybody except such people
as avowedly did not care for hunting or shooting, or golf or skating.
And as all of their ghosts are of their family, it seems reasonable to
suppose that they all, even the poor Blue Lady, excelled at one time in
field-sports. So far then they harbour no such unkindness or contempt,
but only pity. Of one Peveril, indeed, who broke his neck in vainly
attempting to ride up the main staircase on a thoroughbred mare after
some monstrous and violent deed in the back-garden, they are very fond,
and Blanche comes downstairs in the morning with an eye unusually bright
when she can announce that Master Anthony was “very loud” last night. He
(apart from the fact of his having been so foul a ruffian) was a
tremendous fellow across country, and they like these indications of the
continuance of his superb vitality. In fact, it is supposed to be a
compliment, when you go to stay at Church-Peveril, to be assigned a
bedroom which is frequented by defunct members of the family. It means
that you are worthy to look on the august and villainous dead,
and you will find yourself shown into some vaulted or tapestried
chamber, without benefit of electric light, and are told that
great-great-grandmamma Bridget occasionally has vague business by the
fireplace, but it is better not to talk to her, and that you will hear
Master Anthony “awfully well” if he attempts the front staircase any
time before morning. There you are left for your night’s repose, and,
having quakingly undressed, begin reluctantly to put out your candles.
It is draughty in these great chambers, and the solemn tapestry swings
and bellows and subsides, and the firelight dances on the forms of
huntsmen and warriors and stern pursuits. Then you climb into your bed,
a bed so huge that you feel as if the desert of Sahara was spread for
you, and pray, like the mariners who sailed with St Paul, for day. And,
all the time, you are aware that Freddy and Harry and Blanche and
possibly even Mrs Peveril are quite capable of dressing up and making
disquieting tappings outside your door, so that when you open it some
inconjecturable horror fronts you. For myself, I stick steadily to the
assertion that I have an obscure valvular disease of the heart, and so
sleep undisturbed in the new wing of the house where Aunt Barbara, and
great-great-grandmamma Bridget and Master Anthony never penetrate. I
forget the details of great-great-grandmamma Bridget, but she certainly
cut the throat of some distant relation before she disembowelled herself
with the axe that had been used at Agincourt. Before that she had led a
very sultry life, crammed with amazing incident.

       *       *       *       *       *

But there is one ghost at Church-Peveril at which the family never
laugh, in which they feel no friendly and amused interest, and of which
they only speak just as much as is necessary for the safety of their
guests. More properly it should be described as two ghosts, for the
“haunt” in question is that of two very young children, who were twins.
These, not without reason, the family take very seriously indeed. The
story of them, as told me by Mrs Peveril, is as follows:

In the year 1602, the same being the last of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, a
certain Dick Peveril was greatly in favour at Court. He was brother to
Master Joseph Peveril, then owner of the family house and lands, who two
years previously, at the respectable age of seventy-four, became father
of twin boys, first-born of his progeny. It is known that the royal and
ancient virgin had said to handsome Dick, who was nearly forty years his
brother’s junior, “’Tis pity that you are not master of Church Peveril,”
and these words probably suggested to him a sinister design. Be that as
it may, handsome Dick, who very adequately sustained the family
reputation for wickedness, set off to ride down to Yorkshire, and found
that, very conveniently, his brother Joseph had just been seized with an
apoplexy, which appeared to be the result of a continued spell of hot
weather combined with the necessity of quenching his thirst with an
augmented amount of sack, and had actually died while handsome Dick,
with God knows what thoughts in his mind, was journeying northwards.
Thus it came about that he arrived at Church-Peveril just in time for
his brother’s funeral. It was with great propriety that he attended the
obsequies, and returned to spend a sympathetic day or two of mourning
with his widowed sister-in-law, who was but a faint-hearted dame,
little fit to be mated with such hawks as these. On the second night of
his stay, he did that which the Peverils regret to this day. He entered
the room where the twins slept with their nurse, and quietly strangled
the latter as she slept. Then he took the twins and put them into the
fire which warms the long gallery. The weather, which up to the day of
Joseph’s death had been so hot, had changed suddenly to bitter cold, and
the fire was heaped high with burning logs and was exultant with flame.
In the core of this conflagration he struck out a cremation-chamber, and
into that he threw the two children, stamping them down with his
riding-boots. They could just walk, but they could not walk out of that
ardent place. It is said that he laughed as he added more logs. Thus he
became master of Church Peveril.

The crime was never brought home to him, but he lived no longer than a
year in the enjoyment of his blood-stained inheritance. When he lay
a-dying he made his confession to the priest who attended him, but his
spirit struggled forth from its fleshly coil before Absolution could be
given him. On that very night there began in Church-Peveril the haunting
which to this day is but seldom spoken of by the family, and then only
in low tones and with serious mien. For, only an hour or two after
handsome Dick’s death, one of the servants passing the door of the long
gallery heard from within peals of the loud laughter so jovial and yet
so sinister, which he had thought would never be heard in the house
again. In a moment of that cold courage, which is so nearly akin to
mortal terror, he opened the door and entered, expecting to see he knew
not what manifestation of him who lay dead in the room below. Instead he
saw two little white-robed figures toddling towards him hand in hand
across the moon-lit floor.

The watchers in the room below ran upstairs startled by the crash of his
fallen body, and found him lying in the grip of some dread convulsion.
Just before morning he regained consciousness and told his tale. Then
pointing with trembling and ash-grey finger towards the door, he
screamed aloud, and so fell back dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the next fifty years this strange and terrible legend of the
twin-babies became fixed and consolidated. Their appearance, luckily for
those who inhabit the house, was exceedingly rare, and during these
years they seem to have been seen four or five times only. On each
occasion they appeared at night, between sunset and sunrise, always in
the same long gallery, and always as two toddling children scarcely able
to walk. And on each occasion the luckless individual who saw them died
either speedily or terribly, or with both speed and terror, after the
accursed vision had appeared to him. Sometimes he might live for a few
months: he was lucky if he died, as did the servant who first saw them,
in a few hours. Vastly more awful was the fate of a certain Mrs Canning,
who had the ill-luck to see them in the middle of the next century, or
to be quite accurate, in the year 1760. By this time the hours and the
place of their appearance were well-known, and, as up till a year ago,
visitors were warned not to go between sunset and sunrise into the long
gallery.

But Mrs Canning, a brilliantly clever and beautiful woman, admirer also
and friend of the notorious sceptic M. Voltaire, wilfully went and sat
night after night, in spite of all protestations, in the haunted place.
For four evenings she saw nothing, but on the fifth she had her will,
for the door in the middle of the gallery opened, and there came
toddling towards her the ill-omened innocent little pair. It seemed that
even then she was not frightened, but she thought good, poor wretch, to
mock at them, telling them it was time for them to get back into the
fire. They gave no word in answer, but turned away from her crying and
sobbing. Immediately after they disappeared from her vision and she
rustled downstairs to where the family and guests in the house were
waiting for her, with the triumphant announcement that she had seen them
both, and must needs write to M. Voltaire, saying that she had spoken to
spirits made manifest. It would make him laugh. But when some months
later the whole news reached him he did not laugh at all.

Mrs Canning was one of the great beauties of her day, and in the year
1760 she was at the height and zenith of her blossoming. The chief
beauty, if it is possible to single out one point where all was so
exquisite, lay in the dazzling colour and incomparable brilliance of her
complexion. She was now just thirty years of age, but, in spite of the
excesses of her life, retained the snow and roses of girlhood, and she
courted the bright light of day which other women shunned, for it but
showed to greater advantage the splendour of her skin. In consequence
she was very considerably dismayed one morning, about a fortnight after
her strange experience in the long gallery, to observe on her left cheek
an inch or two below her turquoise-coloured eyes, a little greyish patch
of skin, about as big as a threepenny piece. It was in vain that she
applied her accustomed washes and ungents: vain, too, were the arts of
her _fardeuse_ and of her medical adviser. For a week she kept herself
secluded, martyring herself with solitude and unaccustomed physics, and
for result at the end of the week she had no amelioration to comfort
herself with: instead this woeful grey patch had doubled itself in size.
Thereafter the nameless disease, whatever it was, developed in new and
terrible ways. From the centre of the discoloured place there sprouted
forth little lichen-like tendrils of greenish-grey, and another patch
appeared on her lower lip. This, too, soon vegetated, and one morning
on opening her eyes to the horror of a new day, she found that her
vision was strangely blurred. She sprang to her looking-glass, and what
she saw caused her to shriek aloud with horror. From under her upper
eye-lid a fresh growth had sprung up, mushroom-like, in the night, and
its filaments extended downwards, screening the pupil of her eye. Soon
after her tongue and throat were attacked: the air passages became
obstructed, and death by suffocation was merciful after such suffering.

More terrible yet was the case of a certain Colonel Blantyre who fired
at the children with his revolver. What he went through is not to be
recorded here.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is this haunting, then, that the Peverils take quite seriously, and
every guest on his arrival in the house is told that the long gallery
must not be entered after nightfall on any pretext whatever. By day,
however, it is a delightful room and intrinsically merits description,
apart from the fact that the due understanding of its geography is
necessary for the account that here follows. It is full eighty feet in
length, and is lit by a row of six tall windows looking over the gardens
at the back of the house. A door communicates with the landing at the
top of the main staircase, and about half-way down the gallery in the
wall facing the windows is another door communicating with the back
staircase and servants’ quarters, and thus the gallery forms a constant
place of passage for them in going to the rooms on the first landing. It
was through this door that the baby-figures came when they appeared to
Mrs Canning, and on several other occasions they have been known to make
their entry here, for the room out of which handsome Dick took them lies
just beyond at the top of the back stairs. Further on again in the
gallery is the fireplace into which he thrust them, and at the far end a
large bow-window looks straight down the avenue. Above this fireplace
there hangs with grim significance a portrait of handsome Dick, in the
insolent beauty of early manhood, attributed to Holbein, and a dozen
other portraits of great merit face the windows. During the day this is
the most frequented sitting-room in the house, for its other visitors
never appear there then, nor does it then ever resound with the harsh
jovial laugh of handsome Dick, which sometimes, after dark has fallen,
is heard by passers-by on the landing outside. But Blanche does not grow
bright-eyed when she hears it: she shuts her ears and hastens to put a
greater distance between her and the sound of that atrocious mirth.

But during the day the long gallery is frequented by many occupants, and
much laughter in no wise sinister or saturnine resounds there. When
summer lies hot over the land, those occupants lounge in the deep window
seats, and when winter spreads his icy fingers and blows shrilly between
his frozen palms, congregate round the fireplace at the far end, and
perch, in companies of cheerful chatterers, upon sofa and chair, and
chair-back and floor. Often have I sat there on long August evenings up
till dressing-time, but never have I been there when anyone has seemed
disposed to linger over-late without hearing the warning: “It is close
on sunset: shall we go?” Later on in the shorter autumn days they often
have tea laid there, and sometimes it has happened that, even while
merriment was most uproarious, Mrs Peveril has suddenly looked out of
the window and said, “My dears, it is getting so late: let us finish our
nonsense downstairs in the hall.” And then for a moment a curious hush
always falls on loquacious family and guests alike, and as if some bad
news had just been known, we all make our silent way out of the place.
But the spirits of the Peverils (of the living ones, that is to say) are
the most mercurial imaginable, and the blight which the thought of
handsome Dick and his doings casts over them passes away again with
amazing rapidity.

       *       *       *       *       *

A typical party, large, young, and peculiarly cheerful, was staying at
Church-Peveril shortly after Christmas last year, and as usual on
December 31, Mrs Peveril was giving her annual New Year’s Eve ball. The
house was quite full, and she had commandeered as well the greater part
of the Peveril Arms to provide sleeping-quarters for the overflow from
the house. For some days past a black and windless frost had stopped all
hunting, but it is an ill windlessness that blows no good (if so mixed a
metaphor may be forgiven), and the lake below the house had for the last
day or two been covered with an adequate and admirable sheet of ice.
Everyone in the house had been occupied all the morning of that day in
performing swift and violent manœuvres on the elusive surface, and as
soon as lunch was over we all, with one exception, hurried out again.
This one exception was Madge Dalrymple who had had the misfortune to
fall rather badly earlier in the day, but hoped, by resting her injured
knee, instead of joining the skaters again, to be able to dance that
evening. The hope, it is true, was of the most sanguine sort, for she
could but hobble ignobly back to the house, but with the breezy optimism
which characterises the Peverils (she is Blanche’s first cousin), she
remarked that it would be but tepid enjoyment that she could, in her
present state, derive from further skating, and thus she sacrificed
little, but might gain much.

Accordingly after a rapid cup of coffee which was served in the long
gallery, we left Madge comfortably reclined on the big sofa at
right-angles to the fireplace, with an attractive book to beguile the
tedium till tea. Being of the family, she knew all about handsome Dick
and the babies, and the fate of Mrs Canning and Colonel Blantyre, but as
we went out I heard Blanche say to her, “Don’t run it too fine, dear,”
and Madge had replied, “No; I’ll go away well before sunset.” And so we
left her alone in the long gallery.

       *       *       *       *       *

Madge read her attractive book for some minutes, but failing to get
absorbed in it, put it down and limped across to the window. Though it
was still but little after two, it was but a dim and uncertain light
that entered, for the crystalline brightness of the morning had given
place to a veiled obscurity produced by flocks of thick clouds which
were coming sluggishly up from the north-east. Already the whole sky was
overcast with them, and occasionally a few snowflakes fluttered
waveringly down past the long windows. From the darkness and bitter cold
of the afternoon, it seemed to her that there was like to be a heavy
snowfall before long, and these outward signs were echoed inwardly in
her by that muffled drowsiness of the brain, which to those who are
sensitive to the pressures and lightnesses of weather portends storm.
Madge was peculiarly the prey of such external influences: to her a
brisk morning gave an ineffable brightness and briskness of spirit, and
correspondingly the approach of heavy weather produced a somnolence in
sensation that both drowsed and depressed her.

It was in such mood as this that she limped back again to the sofa
beside the log-fire. The whole house was comfortably heated by
water-pipes, and though the fire of logs and peat, an adorable mixture,
had been allowed to burn low, the room was very warm. Idly she watched
the dwindling flames, not opening her book again, but lying on the sofa
with face towards the fireplace, intending drowsily and not immediately
to go to her own room and spend the hours, until the return of the
skaters made gaiety in the house again, in writing one or two neglected
letters. Still drowsily she began thinking over what she had to
communicate: one letter several days overdue should go to her mother,
who was immensely interested in the psychical affairs of the family. She
would tell her how Master Anthony had been prodigiously active on the
staircase a night or two ago, and how the Blue Lady, regardless of the
severity of the weather, had been seen by Mrs Peveril that morning,
strolling about. It was rather interesting: the Blue Lady had gone down
the laurel walk and had been seen by her to enter the stables, where, at
the moment, Freddy Peveril was inspecting the frost-bound hunters.
Identically then, a sudden panic had spread through the stables, and the
horses had whinnied and kicked, and shied, and sweated. Of the fatal
twins nothing had been seen for many years past, but, as her mother
knew, the Peverils never used the long gallery after dark.

Then for a moment she sat up, remembering that she was in the long
gallery now. But it was still but a little after half-past two, and if
she went to her room in half an hour, she would have ample time to
write this and another letter before tea. Till then she would read her
book. But she found she had left it on the window-sill, and it seemed
scarcely worth while to get it. She felt exceedingly drowsy.

The sofa where she lay had been lately re-covered, in a greyish green
shade of velvet, somewhat the colour of lichen. It was of very thick
soft texture, and she luxuriously stretched her arms out, one on each
side of her body, and pressed her fingers into the nap. How horrible
that story of Mrs Canning was: the growth on her face was of the colour
of lichen. And then without further transition or blurring of thought
Madge fell asleep.

She dreamed. She dreamed that she awoke and found herself exactly where
she had gone to sleep, and in exactly the same attitude. The flames from
the logs had burned up again, and leaped on the walls, fitfully
illuminating the picture of handsome Dick above the fire-place. In her
dream she knew exactly what she had done to-day, and for what reason she
was lying here now instead of being out with the rest of the skaters.
She remembered also (still dreaming), that she was going to write a
letter or two before tea, and prepared to get up in order to go to her
room. As she half-rose she caught sight of her own arms lying out on
each side of her on the grey velvet sofa. But she could not see where
her hands ended, and where the grey velvet began: her fingers seemed to
have melted into the stuff. She could see her wrists quite clearly, and
a blue vein on the backs of her hands, and here and there a knuckle.
Then, in her dream she remembered, the last thought which had been in
her mind before she fell asleep, namely the growth of the
lichen-coloured vegetation on the face and the eyes and the throat of
Mrs Canning. At that thought the strangling terror of real nightmare
began: she knew that she was being transformed into this grey stuff, and
she was absolutely unable to move. Soon the grey would spread up her
arms, and over her feet; when they came in from skating they would find
here nothing but a huge misshapen cushion of lichen-coloured velvet, and
that would be she. The horror grew more acute, and then by a violent
effort she shook herself free of the clutches of this very evil dream,
and she awoke.

For a minute or two she lay there, conscious only of the tremendous
relief at finding herself awake. She felt again with her fingers the
pleasant touch of the velvet, and drew them backwards and forwards,
assuring herself that she was not, as her dream had suggested, melting
into greyness and softness. But she was still, in spite of the violence
of her awakening, very sleepy, and lay there till, looking down, she was
aware that she could not see her hands at all. It was very nearly dark.

At that moment a sudden flicker of flame came from the dying fire, and a
flare of burning gas from the peat flooded the room. The portrait of
handsome Dick looked evilly down on her, and her hands were visible
again. And then a panic worse than the panic of her dreams seized her.
Daylight had altogether faded, and she knew that she was alone in the
dark in the terrible gallery. This panic was of the nature of nightmare,
for she felt unable to move for terror. But it was worse than nightmare
because she knew she was awake. And then the full cause of this frozen
fear dawned on her; she knew with the certainty of absolute conviction
that she was about to see the twin-babies.

She felt a sudden moisture break out on her face, and within her mouth
her tongue and throat went suddenly dry, and she felt her tongue grate
along the inner surface of her teeth. All power of movement had slipped
from her limbs, leaving them dead and inert, and she stared with wide
eyes into the blackness. The spurt of flame from the peat had burned
itself out again, and darkness encompassed her.

Then on the wall opposite her, facing the windows, there grew a faint
light of dusky crimson. For a moment she thought it but heralded the
approach of the awful vision, then hope revived in her heart, and she
remembered that thick clouds had overcast the sky before she went to
sleep, and guessed that this light came from the sun not yet quite sunk
and set. This sudden revival of hope gave her the necessary stimulus,
and she sprang off the sofa where she lay. She looked out of the window
and saw the dull glow on the horizon. But before she could take a step
forward it was obscured again. A tiny sparkle of light came from the
hearth which did no more than illuminate the tiles of the fireplace, and
snow falling heavily tapped at the window panes. There was neither light
nor sound except these.

But the courage that had come to her, giving her the power of movement,
had not quite deserted her, and she began feeling her way down the
gallery. And then she found that she was lost. She stumbled against a
chair, and, recovering herself, stumbled against another. Then a table
barred her way, and, turning swiftly aside, she found herself up against
the back of a sofa. Once more she turned and saw the dim gleam of the
firelight on the side opposite to that on which she expected it. In her
blind gropings she must have reversed her direction. But which way was
she to go now? She seemed blocked in by furniture. And all the time
insistent and imminent was the fact that the two innocent terrible
ghosts were about to appear to her.

Then she began to pray, “Lighten our darkness, O Lord,” she said to
herself. But she could not remember how the prayer continued, and she
had sore need of it. There was something about the perils of the night.
All this time she felt about her with groping, fluttering hands. The
fire-glimmer which should have been on her left was on her right again;
therefore she must turn herself round again. “Lighten our darkness,” she
whispered, and then aloud she repeated, “Lighten our darkness.”

She stumbled up against a screen, and could not remember the existence
of any such screen. Hastily she felt beside it with blind hands, and
touched something soft and velvety. Was it the sofa on which she had
lain? If so, where was the head of it. It had a head and a back and
feet--it was like a person, all covered with grey lichen. Then she lost
her head completely. All that remained to her was to pray; she was lost,
lost in this awful place, where no one came in the dark except the
babies that cried. And she heard her voice rising from whisper to
speech, and speech to scream. She shrieked out the holy words, she
yelled them as if blaspheming as she groped among tables and chairs and
the pleasant things of ordinary life which had become so terrible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then came a sudden and an awful answer to her screamed prayer. Once more
a pocket of inflammable gas in the peat on the hearth was reached by the
smouldering embers, and the room started into light. She saw the evil
eyes of handsome Dick, she saw the little ghostly snow-flakes falling
thickly outside. And she saw where she was, just opposite the door
through which the terrible twins made their entrance. Then the flame
went out again, and left her in blackness once more. But she had gained
something, for she had her geography now. The centre of the room was
bare of furniture, and one swift dart would take her to the door of the
landing above the main staircase and into safety. In that gleam she had
been able to see the handle of the door, bright-brassed, luminous like a
star. She would go straight for it; it was but a matter of a few seconds
now.

She took a long breath, partly of relief, partly to satisfy the demands
of her galloping heart. But the breath was only half-taken when she was
stricken once more into the immobility of nightmare.

There came a little whisper, it was no more than that, from the door
opposite which she stood, and through which the twin-babies entered. It
was not quite dark outside it, for she could see that the door was
opening. And there stood in the opening two little white figures, side
by side. They came towards her slowly, shufflingly. She could not see
face or form at all distinctly, but the two little white figures were
advancing. She knew them to be the ghosts of terror, innocent of the
awful doom they were bound to bring, even as she was innocent. With the
inconceivable rapidity of thought, she made up her mind what to do. She
had not hurt them or laughed at them, and they, they were but babies
when the wicked and bloody deed had sent them to their burning death.
Surely the spirits of these children would not be inaccessible to the
cry of one who was of the same blood as they, who had committed no fault
that merited the doom they brought. If she entreated them they might
have mercy, they might forebear to bring the curse on her, they might
allow her to pass out of the place without blight, without the sentence
of death, or the shadow of things worse than death upon her.

It was but for the space of a moment that she hesitated, then she sank
down on to her knees, and stretched out her hands towards them.

“Oh, my dears,” she said, “I only fell asleep. I have done no more wrong
than that----”

She paused a moment, and her tender girl’s heart thought no more of
herself, but only of them, those little innocent spirits on whom so
awful a doom was laid, that they should bring death where other children
bring laughter, and doom for delight. But all those who had seen them
before had dreaded and feared them, or had mocked at them.

Then, as the enlightenment of pity dawned on her, her fear fell from her
like the wrinkled sheath that holds the sweet folded buds of Spring.

“Dears, I am so sorry for you,” she said. “It is not your fault that you
must bring me what you must bring, but I am not afraid any longer. I am
only sorry for you. God bless you, you poor darlings.”

She raised her head and looked at them. Though it was so dark, she could
now see their faces, though all was dim and wavering, like the light of
pale flames shaken by a draught. But the faces were not miserable or
fierce--they smiled at her with shy little baby smiles. And as she
looked they grew faint, fading slowly away like wreaths of vapour in
frosty air.

       *       *       *       *       *

Madge did not at once move when they had vanished, for instead of fear
there was wrapped round her a wonderful sense of peace, so happy and
serene that she would not willingly stir, and so perhaps disturb it. But
before long she got up, and feeling her way, but without any sense of
nightmare pressing her on, or frenzy of fear to spur her, she went out
of the long gallery, to find Blanche just coming upstairs whistling and
swinging her skates.

“How’s the leg, dear,” she asked, “You’re not limping any more.”

Till that moment Madge had not thought of it.

“I think it must be all right,” she said, “I had forgotten it anyhow.
Blanche, dear, you won’t be frightened for me, will you, but--but I have
seen the twins.”

For a moment Blanche’s face whitened with terror.

“What?” she said in a whisper.

“Yes, I saw them just now. But they were kind, they smiled at me, and I
was so sorry for them. And somehow I am sure I have nothing to fear.”

       *       *       *       *       *

It seems that Madge was right, for nothing untoward has come to her.
Something, her attitude to them, we must suppose, her pity, her
sympathy, touched and dissolved and annihilated the curse. Indeed, I was
at Church Peveril only last week, arriving there after dark. Just as I
passed the gallery door, Blanche came out.

“Ah, there you are,” she said, “I’ve just been seeing the twins. They
looked too sweet and stopped nearly ten minutes. Let us have tea at
once.”




CATERPILLARS


I saw a month or two ago in an Italian paper that the Villa Cascana, in
which I once stayed, had been pulled down, and that a manufactory of
some sort was in process of erection on its site. There is therefore no
longer any reason for refraining from writing of those things which I
myself saw (or imagined I saw) in a certain room and on a certain
landing of the villa in question, nor from mentioning the circumstances
which followed, which may or may not (according to the opinion of the
reader) throw some light on or be somehow connected with this
experience.

The Villa Cascana was in all ways but one a perfectly delightful house,
yet, if it were standing now, nothing in the world--I use the phrase in
its literal sense--would induce me to set foot in it again, for I
believe it to have been haunted in a very terrible and practical manner.
Most ghosts, when all is said and done, do not do much harm; they may
perhaps terrify, but the person whom they visit usually gets over their
visitation. They may on the other hand be entirely friendly and
beneficent. But the appearances in the Villa Cascana were not
beneficent, and had they made their “visit” in a very slightly
different manner, I do not suppose I should have got over it any more
than Arthur Inglis did.

       *       *       *       *       *

The house stood on an ilex-clad hill not far from Sestri di Levante on
the Italian Riviera, looking out over the iridescent blues of that
enchanted sea, while behind it rose the pale green chestnut woods that
climb up the hillsides till they give place to the pines that, black in
contrast with them, crown the slopes. All round it the garden in the
luxuriance of mid-spring bloomed and was fragrant, and the scent of
magnolia and rose, borne on the salt freshness of the winds from the
sea, flowed like a stream through the cool vaulted rooms.

On the ground floor a broad pillared _loggia_ ran round three sides of
the house, the top of which formed a balcony for certain rooms of the
first floor. The main staircase, broad and of grey marble steps, led up
from the hall to the landing outside these rooms, which were three in
number, namely two big sitting-rooms and a bedroom arranged _en suite_.
The latter was unoccupied, the sitting-rooms were in use. From these the
main staircase was continued to the second floor, where were situated
certain bedrooms, one of which I occupied, while from the other side of
the first-floor landing some half-dozen steps led to another suite of
rooms, where, at the time I am speaking of, Arthur Inglis, the artist,
had his bedroom and studio. Thus the landing outside my bedroom at the
top of the house, commanded both the landing of the first floor, and
also the steps that led to Inglis’ rooms. Jim Stanley and his wife,
finally (whose guest I was), occupied rooms in another wing of the
house, where also were the servants’ quarters.

I arrived just in time for lunch on a brilliant noon of mid-May. The
garden was shouting with colour and fragrance, and not less delightful
after my broiling walk up from the _marina_, should have been the coming
from the reverberating heat and blaze of the day into the marble
coolness of the villa. Only (the reader has my bare word for this, and
nothing more), the moment I set foot in the house I felt that something
was wrong. This feeling, I may say, was quite vague, though very strong,
and I remember that when I saw letters waiting for me on the table in
the hall I felt certain that the explanation was here: I was convinced
that there was bad news of some sort for me. Yet when I opened them I
found no such explanation of my premonition: my correspondents all
reeked of prosperity. Yet this clear miscarriage of a presentiment did
not dissipate my uneasiness. In that cool fragrant house there was
something wrong.

I am at pains to mention this because to the general view it may explain
that though I am as a rule so excellent a sleeper that the extinction of
my light on getting into bed is apparently contemporaneous with being
called on the following morning, I slept very badly on my first night
in the Villa Cascana. It may also explain the fact that when I did sleep
(if it was indeed in sleep that I saw what I thought I saw) I dreamed in
a very vivid and original manner, original, that is to say, in the sense
that something that, as far as I knew, had never previously entered into
my consciousness, usurped it then. But since, in addition to this evil
premonition, certain words and events occurring during the rest of the
day, might have suggested something of what I thought happened that
night, it will be well to relate them.

After lunch, then, I went round the house with Mrs Stanley, and during
our tour she referred, it is true, to the unoccupied bedroom on the
first floor, which opened out of the room where we had lunched.

“We left that unoccupied,” she said, “because Jim and I have a charming
bedroom and dressing-room, as you saw, in the wing, and if we used it
ourselves we should have to turn the dining-room into a dressing-room
and have our meals downstairs. As it is, however, we have our little
flat there, Arthur Inglis has his little flat in the other passage; and
I remembered (aren’t I extraordinary?) that you once said that the
higher up you were in a house the better you were pleased. So I put you
at the top of the house, instead of giving you that room.”

It is true, that a doubt, vague as my uneasy premonition, crossed my
mind at this. I did not see why Mrs Stanley should have explained all
this, if there had not been more to explain. I allow, therefore, that
the thought that there was something to explain about the unoccupied
bedroom was momentarily present to my mind.

The second thing that may have borne on my dream was this.

At dinner the conversation turned for a moment on ghosts. Inglis, with
the certainty of conviction, expressed his belief that anybody who could
possibly believe in the existence of supernatural phenomena was unworthy
of the name of an ass. The subject instantly dropped. As far as I can
recollect, nothing else occurred or was said that could bear on what
follows.

We all went to bed rather early, and personally I yawned my way
upstairs, feeling hideously sleepy. My room was rather hot, and I threw
all the windows wide, and from without poured in the white light of the
moon, and the love-song of many nightingales. I undressed quickly, and
got into bed, but though I had felt so sleepy before, I now felt
extremely wide-awake. But I was quite content to be awake: I did not
toss or turn, I felt perfectly happy listening to the song and seeing
the light. Then, it is possible, I may have gone to sleep, and what
follows may have been a dream. I thought anyhow that after a time the
nightingales ceased singing and the moon sank. I thought also that if,
for some unexplained reason, I was going to lie awake all night, I might
as well read, and I remembered that I had left a book in which I was
interested in the dining-room on the first floor. So I got out of bed,
lit a candle, and went downstairs. I went into the room, saw on a
side-table the book I had come to look for, and then, simultaneously,
saw that the door into the unoccupied bedroom was open. A curious grey
light, not of dawn nor of moonshine, came out of it, and I looked in.
The bed stood just opposite the door, a big four-poster, hung with
tapestry at the head. Then I saw that the greyish light of the bedroom
came from the bed, or rather from what was on the bed. For it was
covered with great caterpillars, a foot or more in length, which crawled
over it. They were faintly luminous, and it was the light from them that
showed me the room. Instead of the sucker-feet of ordinary caterpillars
they had rows of pincers like crabs, and they moved by grasping what
they lay on with their pincers, and then sliding their bodies forward.
In colour these dreadful insects were yellowish-grey, and they were
covered with irregular lumps and swellings. There must have been
hundreds of them, for they formed a sort of writhing, crawling pyramid
on the bed. Occasionally one fell off on to the floor, with a soft
fleshy thud, and though the floor was of hard concrete, it yielded to
the pincer-feet as if it had been putty, and, crawling back, the
caterpillar would mount on to the bed again, to rejoin its fearful
companions. They appeared to have no faces, so to speak, but at one end
of them there was a mouth that opened sideways in respiration.

Then, as I looked, it seemed to me as if they all suddenly became
conscious of my presence. All the mouths at any rate were turned in my
direction, and next moment they began dropping off the bed with those
soft fleshy thuds on to the floor, and wriggling towards me. For one
second a paralysis as of a dream was on me, but the next I was running
upstairs again to my room, and I remember feeling the cold of the marble
steps on my bare feet. I rushed into my bedroom, and slammed the door
behind me, and then--I was certainly wide awake now--I found myself
standing by my bed with the sweat of terror pouring from me. The noise
of the banged door still rang in my ears. But, as would have been more
usual, if this had been mere nightmare, the terror that had been mine
when I saw those foul beasts crawling about the bed or dropping softly
on to the floor did not cease then. Awake now, if dreaming before, I did
not at all recover from the horror of dream: it did not seem to me that
I had dreamed. And until dawn, I sat or stood, not daring to lie down,
thinking that every rustle or movement that I heard was the approach of
the caterpillars. To them and the claws that bit into the cement the
wood of the door was child’s play: steel would not keep them out.

But with the sweet and noble return of day the horror vanished: the
whisper of wind became benignant again: the nameless fear, whatever it
was, was smoothed out and terrified me no longer. Dawn broke, hueless at
first; then it grew dove-coloured, then the flaming pageant of light
spread over the sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

The admirable rule of the house was that everybody had breakfast where
and when he pleased, and in consequence it was not till lunch-time that
I met any of the other members of our party, since I had breakfast on my
balcony, and wrote letters and other things till lunch. In fact, I got
down to that meal rather late, after the other three had begun. Between
my knife and fork there was a small pill-box of cardboard, and as I sat
down Inglis spoke.

“Do look at that,” he said, “since you are interested in natural
history. I found it crawling on my counterpane last night, and I don’t
know what it is.”

I think that before I opened the pill-box I expected something of the
sort which I found in it. Inside it, anyhow, was a small caterpillar,
greyish-yellow in colour, with curious bumps and excrescences on its
rings. It was extremely active, and hurried round the box, this way and
that. Its feet were unlike the feet of any caterpillar I ever saw: they
were like the pincers of a crab. I looked, and shut the lid down again.

“No, I don’t know it,” I said, “but it looks rather unwholesome. What
are you going to do with it?”

“Oh, I shall keep it,” said Inglis. “It has begun to spin: I want to see
what sort of a moth it turns into.”

I opened the box again, and saw that these hurrying movements were
indeed the beginning of the spinning of the web of its cocoon. Then
Inglis spoke again.

“It has got funny feet, too,” he said. “They are like crabs’ pincers.
What’s the Latin for crab? Oh, yes, Cancer. So in case it is unique,
let’s christen it: ‘Cancer Inglisensis.’”

Then something happened in my brain, some momentary piecing together of
all that I had seen or dreamed. Something in his words seemed to me to
throw light on it all, and my own intense horror at the experience of
the night before linked itself on to what he had just said. In effect, I
took the box and threw it, caterpillar and all, out of the window. There
was a gravel path just outside, and beyond it, a fountain playing into a
basin. The box fell on to the middle of this.

Inglis laughed.

“So the students of the occult don’t like solid facts,” he said. “My
poor caterpillar!”

The talk went off again at once on to other subjects, and I have only
given in detail, as they happened, these trivialities in order to be
sure myself that I have recorded everything that could have borne on
occult subjects or on the subject of caterpillars. But at the moment
when I threw the pill-box into the fountain, I lost my head: my only
excuse is that, as is probably plain, the tenant of it was, in
miniature, exactly what I had seen crowded on to the bed in the
unoccupied room. And though this translation of those phantoms into
flesh and blood--or whatever it is that caterpillars are made of--ought
perhaps to have relieved the horror of the night, as a matter of fact it
did nothing of the kind. It only made the crawling pyramid that covered
the bed in the unoccupied room more hideously real.

       *       *       *       *       *

After lunch we spent a lazy hour or two strolling about the garden or
sitting in the loggia, and it must have been about four o’clock when
Stanley and I started off to bathe, down the path that led by the
fountain into which I had thrown the pill-box. The water was shallow and
clear, and at the bottom of it I saw its white remains. The water had
disintegrated the cardboard, and it had become no more than a few strips
and shreds of sodden paper. The centre of the fountain was a marble
Italian Cupid which squirted the water out of a wine-skin held under its
arm. And crawling up its leg was the caterpillar. Strange and scarcely
credible as it seemed, it must have survived the falling-to-bits of its
prison, and made its way to shore, and there it was, out of arm’s reach,
weaving and waving this way and that as it evolved its cocoon.

Then, as I looked at it, it seemed to me again that, like the
caterpillar I had seen last night, it saw me, and breaking out of the
threads that surrounded it, it crawled down the marble leg of the Cupid
and began swimming like a snake across the water of the fountain towards
me. It came with extraordinary speed (the fact of a caterpillar being
able to swim was new to me), and in another moment was crawling up the
marble lip of the basin. Just then Inglis joined us.

“Why, if it isn’t old ‘Cancer Inglisensis’ again,” he said, catching
sight of the beast. “What a tearing hurry it is in.”

We were standing side by side on the path, and when the caterpillar had
advanced to within about a yard of us, it stopped, and began waving
again, as if in doubt as to the direction in which it should go. Then it
appeared to make up its mind, and crawled on to Inglis’ shoe.

“It likes me best,” he said, “but I don’t really know that I like it.
And as it won’t drown I think perhaps----”

He shook it off his shoe on to the gravel path and trod on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

All afternoon the air got heavier and heavier with the Sirocco that was
without doubt coming up from the south, and that night again I went up
to bed feeling very sleepy; but below my drowsiness, so to speak, there
was the consciousness, stronger than before, that there was something
wrong in the house, that something dangerous was close at hand. But I
fell asleep at once, and--how long after I do not know--either woke or
dreamed I awoke, feeling that I must get up at once, _or I should be too
late_. Then (dreaming or awake) I lay and fought this fear, telling
myself that I was but the prey of my own nerves disordered by Sirocco or
what not, and at the same time quite clearly knowing in another part of
my mind, so to speak, that every moment’s delay added to the danger. At
last this second feeling became irresistible, and I put on coat and
trousers and went out of my room on to the landing. And then I saw that
I had already delayed too long, and that I was now too late.

The whole of the landing of the first floor below was invisible under
the swarm of caterpillars that crawled there. The folding doors into the
sitting-room from which opened the bedroom where I had seen them last
night, were shut, but they were squeezing through the cracks of it, and
dropping one by one through the keyhole, elongating themselves into mere
string as they passed, and growing fat and lumpy again on emerging.
Some, as if exploring, were nosing about the steps into the passage at
the end of which were Inglis’ rooms, others were crawling on the lowest
steps of the staircase that led up to where I stood. The landing,
however, was completely covered with them: I was cut off. And of the
frozen horror that seized me when I saw that, I can give no idea in
words.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then at last a general movement began to take place, and they grew
thicker on the steps that led to Inglis’ room. Gradually, like some
hideous tide of flesh, they advanced along the passage, and I saw the
foremost, visible by the pale grey luminousness that came from them,
reach his door. Again and again I tried to shout and warn him, in terror
all the time that they would turn at the sound of my voice and mount my
stair instead, but for all my efforts I felt that no sound came from my
throat. They crawled along the hinge-crack of his door, passing through
as they had done before, and still I stood there making impotent efforts
to shout to him, to bid him escape while there was time.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last the passage was completely empty: they had all gone, and at that
moment I was conscious for the first time of the cold of the marble
landing on which I stood barefooted. The dawn was just beginning to
break in the Eastern sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

Six months later I met Mrs Stanley in a country house in England. We
talked on many subjects and at last she said:

“I don’t think I have seen you since I got that dreadful news about
Arthur Inglis a month ago.”

“I haven’t heard,” said I.

“No? He has got cancer. They don’t even advise an operation, for there
is no hope of a cure: he is riddled with it, the doctors say.”

Now during all these six months I do not think a day had passed on which
I had not had in my mind the dreams (or whatever you like to call them)
which I had seen in the Villa Cascana.

“It is awful, is it not?” she continued, “and I feel, I can’t help
feeling, that he may have----”

“Caught it at the villa?” I asked.

She looked at me in blank surprise.

“Why did you say that?” she asked. “How did you know?”

Then she told me. In the unoccupied bedroom a year before there had been
a fatal case of cancer. She had, of course, taken the best advice and
had been told that the utmost dictates of prudence would be obeyed so
long as she did not put anybody to sleep in the room, which had also
been thoroughly disinfected and newly white-washed and painted. But----




THE CAT


Many people will, doubtless, remember that exhibition at the Royal
Academy, not so many seasons ago, which came to be known as Alingham’s
year, when Dick Alingham vaulted, with one bound, as it were, out of the
crowd of strugglers and seated himself with admirably certain poise on
the very topmost pinnacle of contemporary fame. He exhibited three
portraits, each a master-piece, which killed every picture within range.
But since that year nobody cared anything for pictures whether in or out
of range except those three, it did not signify so greatly. The
phenomenon of his appearance was as sudden as that of the meteor, coming
from nowhere and sliding large and luminous across the remote and
star-sown sky, as inexplicable as the bursting of a spring on some
dust-ridden rocky hillside. Some fairy godmother, one might conjecture,
had bethought herself of her forgotten godson, and with a wave of her
wand bestowed on him this transcendant gift. But, as the Irish say, she
held her wand in her left hand, for her gift had another side to it. Or
perhaps, again, Jim Merwick is right, and the theory he propounds in his
monograph, “On certain obscure lesions of the nerve centres,” says the
final word on the subject.

Dick Alingham himself, as was indeed natural, was delighted with his
fairy godmother or his obscure lesion (whichever was responsible), and
(the monograph spoken of above was written after Dick’s death) confessed
frankly to his friend Merwick, who was still struggling through the
crowd of rising young medical practitioners, that it was all quite as
inexplicable to himself as it was to anyone else.

“All I know about it,” he said, “is that last autumn I went through two
months of mental depression so hideous that I thought again and again
that I must go off my head. For hours daily, I sat here, waiting for
something to crack, which as far as I am concerned would end everything.
Yes, there was a cause; you know it.”

He paused a moment and poured into his glass a fairly liberal allowance
of whisky, filled it half up from a syphon, and lit a cigarette. The
cause, indeed, had no need to be enlarged on, for Merwick quite well
remembered how the girl Dick had been engaged to, threw him over with an
abruptness that was almost superb, when a more eligible suitor made his
appearance. The latter was certainly very eligible indeed with his
good looks, his title, and his million of money, and Lady
Madingley--ex-future Mrs Alingham--was perfectly content with what she
had done. She was one of those blonde, lithe, silken girls who, happily
for the peace of men’s minds, are rather rare, and who remind one of
some humanised yet celestial and bestial cat.

“I needn’t speak of the cause,” Dick continued, “but, as I say, for
those two months I soberly thought that the only end to it would be
madness. Then one evening when I was sitting here alone--I was always
sitting alone--something did snap in my head. I know I wondered, without
caring at all, whether this was the madness which I had been expecting,
or whether (which would be preferable) some more fatal breakage had
happened. And even while I wondered, I was aware that I was not
depressed or unhappy any longer.”

He paused for so long in a smiling retrospect that Merwick indicated to
him that he had a listener.

“Well?” he said.

“It was well indeed. I haven’t been unhappy since. I have been riotously
happy instead. Some divine doctor, I suppose, just wiped off that stain
on my brain that hurt so. Heavens, how it hurt! Have a drink, by the
way?”

“No, thanks,” said Merwick. “But what has all this got to do with your
painting?”

“Why, everything. For I had hardly realised the fact that I was happy
again, when I was aware that everything looked different. The colours of
all I saw were twice as vivid as they had been, shape and outline were
intensified too. The whole visible world had been dusty and blurred
before, and seen in a half light. But now the lights were turned up, and
there was a new heaven and a new earth. And in the same flash, I knew
that I could paint things as I saw them. Which,” he concluded, “I have
done.”

There was something rather sublime about this, and Merwick laughed.

“I wish something would snap in my brain, if it kindles the perceptions
in that way,” said he, “but it is just possible that the snapping of
things in one’s brain does not always produce just that effect.”

“That is possible. Also, as I gather, things don’t snap unless you have
gone through some such hideous period as I have been through. And I tell
you frankly that I wouldn’t go through that again even to ensure a snap
that would make me see things like Titian.”

“What did the snapping feel like?” asked Merwick.

Dick considered a moment.

“Do you know when a parcel comes, tied up with string, and you can’t
find a knife,” he said, “and therefore you burn the string through,
holding it taut? Well, it was like that: quite painless, only something
got weaker and weaker, and then parted, softly without effort. Not very
lucid, I’m afraid, but it was just like that. It had been burning a
couple of months, you see.”

He turned away and hunted among the letters and papers which littered
his writing-table till he found an envelope with a coronet on it. He
chuckled to himself as he took it up.

“Commend me to Lady Madingley,” he said, “for a brazen impudence in
comparison with which brass is softer than putty. She wrote to me
yesterday, asking me if I would finish the portrait I had begun of her
last year, and let her have it at my own price.”

“Then I think you have had a lucky escape,” remarked Merwick, “I suppose
you didn’t even answer her.”

“Oh, yes, I did: why not? I said the price would be two thousand pounds,
and I was ready to go on at once. She has agreed, and sent me a cheque
for a thousand this evening.”

Merwick stared at him in blank astonishment. “Are you mad?” he asked.

“I hope not, though one can never be sure about little points like that.
Even doctors like you don’t know exactly what constitutes madness.”

Merwick got up.

“But is it possible that you don’t see what a terrible risk you run?” he
asked. “To see her again, to be with her like that, having to look at
her--I saw her this afternoon by the way, hardly human--may not that so
easily revive again all that you felt before? It is too dangerous: much
too dangerous.”

Dick shook his head.

“There is not the slightest risk,” he said, “everything within me is
utterly and absolutely indifferent to her. I don’t even hate her: if I
hated her there might be a possibility of my again loving her. As it is,
the thought of her does not arouse in me any emotion of any kind. And
really such stupendous calmness deserves to be rewarded. I respect
colossal things like that.”

He finished his whisky as he spoke, and instantly poured himself out
another glass.

“That’s the fourth,” said his friend.

“Is it? I never count. It shows a sordid attention to uninteresting
detail. Funnily enough too, alcohol does not have the smallest effect on
me now.”

“Why drink then?”

“Because if I give it up this entrancing vividness of colour and clarity
of outline is a little diminished.”

“Can’t be good for you,” said the doctor.

Dick laughed.

“My dear fellow, look at me carefully,” he said, “and then if you can
conscientiously declare that I show any signs of indulging in
stimulants, I’ll give them up altogether.”

Certainly it would have been hard to find a point in which Dick did not
present the appearance of perfect health. He had paused, and stood still
a moment, his glass in one hand, the whisky-bottle in the other, black
against the front of his shirt, and not a tremor of unsteadiness was
there. His face of wholesome sun-burnt hue was neither puffy nor
emaciated, but firm of flesh and of a wonderful clearness of skin. Clear
too was his eye, with eyelids neither baggy nor puckered; he looked
indeed a model of condition, hard and fit, as if he was in training for
some athletic event. Lithe and active too was his figure, his movements
were quick and precise, and even Merwick, with his doctor’s eye, trained
to detect any symptom, however slight, in which the drinker must betray
himself, was bound to confess that no such was here present. His
appearance contradicted it authoritatively, so also did his manner; he
met the eye of the man he was talking to without sideway glances; he
showed no signs however small, of any disorder of the nerves. Yet Dick
was altogether an abnormal fellow; the history he had just been
recounting was abnormal, those weeks of depression, followed by the
sudden snap in his brain which had apparently removed, as a wet cloth
removes a stain, all the memory of his love, and of the cruel bitterness
that resulted from it. Abnormal too was his sudden leap into high
artistic achievement from a past of very mediocre performance. Why
should there then not be a similar abnormality here?

“Yes, I confess you show no sign of taking excessive stimulant,” said
Merwick, “but if I attended you professionally--ah, I’m not touting--I
should make you give up all stimulant, and go to bed for a month.”

“Why in the name of goodness?” asked Dick.

“Because, theoretically, it must be the best thing you could do. You had
a shock, how severe, the misery of those weeks of depression tells you.
Well, common-sense says, ‘Go slow after a shock; recoup.’ Instead of
which you go very fast indeed and produce. I grant it seems to suit you;
you also became suddenly capable of feats which--oh, it’s sheer
nonsense, man.”

“What’s sheer nonsense?”

“You are. Professionally, I detest you, because you appear to be an
exception to a theory that I am sure must be right. Therefore I have got
to explain you away, and at present I can’t.”

“What’s the theory?” asked Dick.

“Well, the treatment of shock first of all. And secondly, that in order
to do good work, one ought to eat and drink very little and sleep a lot.
How long do you sleep by the way?”

Dick considered.

“Oh, I go to bed about three usually,” he said; “I suppose I sleep for
about four hours.”

“And live on whisky, and eat like a Strasburg goose, and are prepared to
run a race to-morrow. Go away, or at least I will. Perhaps you’ll break
down, though. That would satisfy me. But even if you don’t, it still
remains quite interesting.”

Merwick found it more than quite interesting in fact, and when he got
home that night he searched in his shelves for a certain dusky volume in
which he turned up a chapter called “Shock.” The book was a treatise on
obscure diseases and abnormal conditions of the nervous system. He had
often read it before, for in his profession he was a special student of
the rare and curious. And the following paragraph which had interested
him much before, interested him more than ever this evening.

“The nervous system also can act in a way that must always even to the
most advanced student be totally unexpected. Cases are known, and
well-authenticated ones, when a paralytic person has jumped out of bed
on the cry of ‘Fire.’ Cases too are known when a great shock, which
produces depression so profound as to amount to lethargy, is followed by
abnormal activity, and the calling into use of powers which were
previously unknown to exist, or at any rate existed in a quite ordinary
degree. Such a hyper-sensitised state, especially since the desire for
sleep or rest is very often much diminished, demands much stimulant in
the way of food and alcohol. It would appear also that the patient
suffering from this rare form of the after-consequences of shock has
sooner or later some sudden and complete break-down. It is impossible,
however, to conjecture what form this will take. The digestion, however,
may become suddenly atrophied, delirium tremens may, without warning,
supervene, or he may go completely off his head....”

       *       *       *       *       *

But the weeks passed on, the July suns made London reel in a haze of
heat, and yet Alingham remained busy, brilliant and altogether
exceptional. Merwick, unknown to him, was watching him closely, and at
present was completely puzzled. He held Dick to his word that if he
could detect the slightest sign of over-indulgence in stimulant, he
would cut it off altogether, but he could see absolutely none. Lady
Madingley meantime had given him several sittings, and in this
connection again Merwick was utterly mistaken in the view he had
expressed to Dick as to the risks he ran. For, strangely enough, the two
had become great friends. Yet Dick was quite right, all emotion with
regard to her on his part was dead, it might have been a piece of
still-life that he was painting, instead of a woman he had wildly
worshipped.

One morning in mid-July she had been sitting to him in his studio, and
contrary to custom he had been rather silent, biting the ends of his
brushes, frowning at his canvas, frowning too at her. Suddenly he gave a
little impatient exclamation.

“It’s so like you,” he said, “but it just isn’t you. There’s a lot of
difference! I can’t help making you look as if you were listening to a
hymn, one of those in four sharps, don’t you know, written by an
organist, probably after eating muffins. And that’s not characteristic
of you!”

She laughed.

“You must be rather ingenious to put all that in,” she said.

“I am.”

“Where do I show it all?”

Dick sighed.

“Oh, in your eyes of course,” he said. “You show everything by your
eyes, you know. It is entirely characteristic of you. You are a
throw-back; don’t you remember we settled that ever so long ago, to the
brute creation, who likewise show everything by their eyes.”

“Oh-h. I should have thought that dogs growled at you, and cats
scratched.”

“Those are practical measures, but short of that you and animals use
their eyes only, whereas people use their mouths and foreheads and other
things. A pleased dog, an expectant dog, a hungry dog, a jealous dog, a
disappointed dog--one gathers all that from a dog’s eyes. Their mouths
are comparatively immobile, and a cat’s is even more so.”

“You have often told me that I belong to the genus cat,” said Lady
Madingley, with complete composure.

“By Jove, yes,” said he. “Perhaps looking at the eyes of a cat would
help me to see what I miss. Many thanks for the hint.”

He put down his palette and went to a side table on which stood bottles
and ice and syphons.

“No drink of any kind on this Sahara of a morning?” he asked.

“No, thanks. Now when will you give me the final sitting? You said you
only wanted one more.”

Dick helped himself.

“Well, I go down to the country with this,” he said, “to put in the
background I told you of. With luck it will take me three days hard
painting, without luck a week or more. Oh, my mouth waters at the
thought of the background. So shall we say to-morrow week?”

Lady Madingley made a note of this in a minute gold and jewelled
memorandum book.

“And I am to be prepared to see cat’s eyes painted there instead of my
own when I see it next?” she asked, passing by the canvas.

Dick laughed.

“Oh, you will hardly notice the difference,” he said. “How odd it is
that I always have detested cats so--they make me feel actually faint,
although you always reminded me of a cat.”

“You must ask your friend Mr Merwick about these metaphysical
mysteries,” said she.

       *       *       *       *       *

The background to the picture was at present only indicated by a few
vague splashes close to the side of the head of brilliant purple and
brilliant green, and the artist’s mouth might well water at the thought
of the few days painting that lay before him. For behind the figure in
the long panel-shaped canvas was to be painted a green trellis, over
which, almost hiding the woodwork, there was to sprawl a great purple
clematis in full flaunting glory of varnished leaf and starry flower. At
the top would be just a strip of pale summer sky, at her feet just a
strip of grey-green grass, but all the rest of the background, greatly
daring, would be this diaper of green and purple. For the purpose of
putting this in, he was going down to a small cottage of his near
Godalming, where he had built in the garden a sort of outdoor studio, an
erection betwixt a room and a mere shelter, with the side to the north
entirely open, and flanked by this green trellis which was now one
immense constellation of purple stars. Framed in this, he well knew how
the strange pale beauty of his sitter would glow on the canvas, how she
would start out of the background, she and her huge grey hat, and
shining grey dress, and yellow hair and ivory white skin and pale eyes,
now blue, now grey, now green. This was indeed a thing to look forward
to, for there is probably no such unadulterated rapture known to men as
creation, and it was small wonder that Dick’s mood, as he travelled down
to Godalming, was buoyant and effervescent. For he was going, so to
speak, to realise his creation: every purple star of clematis, every
green leaf and piece of trellis-work that he put in, would cause what he
had painted to live and shine, just as it is the layers of dusk that
fall over the sky at evening which make the stars to sparkle there,
jewel-like. His scheme was assured, he had hung his constellation--the
figure of Lady Madingley--in the sky: and now he had to surround it with
the green and purple night, so that it might shine.

His garden was but a circumscribed plot, but walls of old brick
circumscribed it, and he had dealt with the space at his command with a
certain originality. At no time had his grass plot (you could scarcely
call it “lawn”) been spacious; now the outdoor studio, twenty-five feet
by thirty, took up the greater part of it. He had a solid wooden wall on
one side and two trellis walls to the south and east, which creepers
were beginning to clothe and which were faced internally by hangings of
Syrian and Oriental work. Here in the summer he passed the greater part
of the day, painting or idling, and living an outdoor existence. The
floor, which had once been grass, which had withered completely under
the roof, was covered with Persian rugs; a writing-table, and a
dining-table were there, a bookcase full of familiar friends and a
half-dozen of basket chairs. One corner, too, was frankly given up to
the affairs of the garden, and a mowing machine, a hose for watering,
shears, and spade stood there. For like many excitable persons, Dick
found that in gardening, that incessant process of plannings and
designings to suit the likings of plants, and make them gorgeous in
colour and high of growth, there was a wonderful calm haven of refuge
for the brain that had been tossing on emotional seas. Plants, too, were
receptive, so responsive to kindness; thought given to them was never
thought wasted, and to come back now after a month’s absence in London
was to be assured of fresh surprise and pleasure in each foot of
garden-bed. And here, with how regal a generosity was the purple
clematis to repay him for the care lavished on it. Every flower would
show its practical gratitude by standing model for the background of his
picture.

The evening was very warm, warm not with any sultry premonition of
thunder, but with the clear, clean heat of summer, and he dined alone in
his shelter, with the after-flames of the sunset for his lamp. These
slowly faded into a sky of velvet blue, but he lingered long over his
coffee looking northwards across the garden towards the row of trees
that screened him from the house beyond. These were acacias, most
graceful and feminine of all green things that grow, summer-plumaged
now, yet still fresh of leaf. Below them ran a little raised terrace of
turf and nearer the beds of the beloved garden; clumps of sweet peas
made an inimitable fragrance, and the rose-beds were pink with _Baroness
Rothschild_ and _La France_, and copper-coloured with _Beauté
inconstante_, and the _Richardson_ rose. Then, nearer at hand, was the
green trellis foaming with purple.

He was sitting there, hardly looking, but unconsciously drinking in this
great festival of colour, when his eye was arrested by a dark slinking
form that appeared among the roses, and suddenly turned two shining
luminous orbs on him. At this he started up, but his movement caused no
perturbation in the animal, which continued with back arched for
stroking, and poker-like tail, to advance towards him, purring. As it
came closer Dick felt that shuddering faintness, which often affected
him in the presence of cats, come over him, and he stamped and clapped
his hands. At this it turned tail quickly: a sort of dark shadow
streaked the garden-wall for a moment, and it vanished. But its
appearance had spoiled for him the sweet spell of the evening, and he
went indoors.

The next morning was pellucid summer: a faint north wind blew, and a sun
worthy to illumine the isles of Greece flooded the sky. Dick’s dreamless
and (for him) long sleep had banished from his mind that rather
disquieting incident of the cat, and he set up his canvas facing the
trellis-work and purple clematis with a huge sense of imminent ecstasy.
Also the garden, which at present he had only seen in the magic of
sunset, was gloriously rewarding, and glowed with colour, and though
life--this was present to his mind for the first time for months--in
the shape of Lady Madingley had not been very propitious, yet a man, he
argued to himself, must be a very poor hand at living if, with a passion
for plants and a passion for art, he cannot fashion a life that shall be
full of content. So breakfast being finished, and his model ready and
glowing with beauty, he quickly sketched in the broad lines of flowers
and foliage and began to paint.

Purple and green, green and purple: was there ever such a feast for the
eye? Gourmet like and greedy as well, he was utterly absorbed in it. He
was right too: as soon as he put on the first brush of colour he knew he
was right. It was just those divine and violent colours which would
cause his figure to step out from the picture, it was just that pale
strip of sky above which would focus her again, it was just that strip
of grey-green grass below her feet that would prevent her, so it seemed,
from actually leaving the canvas. And with swift eager sweeps of the
brush which never paused and never hurried, he lost himself in his work.

He stopped at length with a sense of breathlessness, feeling too as if
he had been suddenly called back from some immense distance off. He must
have been working some three hours, for his man was already laying the
table for lunch, yet it seemed to him that the morning had gone by in
one flash. The progress he had made was extraordinary, and he looked
long at his picture. Then his eye wandered from the brightness of the
canvas to the brightness of the garden-beds. There, just in front of the
bed of sweet-peas, not two yards from him, stood a very large grey cat,
watching him.

Now the presence of a cat was a thing that usually produced in Dick a
feeling of deadly faintness, yet, at this moment, as he looked at the
cat and the cat at him, he was conscious of no such feeling, and put
down the absence of it, in so far as he consciously thought about it, to
the fact that he was in the open air, not in the atmosphere of a closed
room. Yet, last night out here, the cat had made him feel faint. But he
hardly gave a thought to this, for what filled his mind was that he saw
in the rather friendly interested look of the beast that expression in
the eye which had so baffled him in his portrait of Lady Madingley. So,
slowly, and without any sudden movement that might startle the cat, he
reached out his hand for the palette he had just put down, and in a
corner of the canvas not yet painted over, recorded in half a dozen
swift intuitive touches, what he wanted. Even in the broad sunlight
where the animal stood, its eyes looked as if they were internally
smouldering as well as being lit from without: it was just so that Lady
Madingley looked. He would have to lay colour very thinly over white....

For five minutes or so he painted them with quiet eager strokes,
drawing the colour thinly over the background of white, and then looked
long at that sketch of the eye to see if he had got what he wanted. Then
he looked back at the cat which had stood so charmingly for him. But
there was no cat there. That, however, since he detested them, and this
one had served his purpose, was no matter for regret, and he merely
wondered a little at the suddenness of its disappearance. But the legacy
it had left on the canvas could not vanish thus, it was his own, a
possession, an achievement. Truly this was to be a portrait which would
altogether out-distance all he had ever done before. A woman, real,
alive, wearing her soul in her eyes, should stand there, and summer riot
round her.

An extraordinary clearness of vision was his all day, and towards sunset
an empty whisky-bottle. But this evening he was conscious for the first
time of two feelings, one physical, one mental, altogether strange to
him: the first an impression that he had drunk as much as was good for
him, the second a sort of echo in his mind of those tortures he had
undergone in the autumn, when he had been tossed aside by the girl, to
whom he had given his soul, like a soiled glove. Neither were at all
acutely felt, but both were present to him.

The evening altogether belied the brilliance of the day, and about six
o’clock thick clouds had driven up over the sky, and the clear heat of
summer had given place to a heat no less intense, but full of the
menace of storm. A few big hot drops, too, of rain warned him further,
and he pulled his easel into shelter, and gave orders that he would dine
indoors. As was usual with him when he was at work, he shunned the
distracting influence of any companionship, and he dined alone. Dinner
finished, he went into his sitting-room prepared to enjoy his solitary
evening. His servant had brought him in the tray, and till he went to
bed he would be undisturbed. Outside the storm was moving nearer, the
reverberation of the thunder, though not yet close, kept up a continual
growl: any moment it might move up and burst above in riot of fire and
sound.

Dick read a book for a while, but his thoughts wandered. The poignancy
of his trouble last autumn, which he thought had passed away from him
for ever, grew suddenly and strangely more acute, also his head was
heavy, perhaps with the storm, but possibly with what he had drunk. So,
intending to go to bed and sleep off his disquietude, he closed his
book, and went across to the window to close that also. But, half-way
towards it, he stopped. There on the sofa below it sat a large grey cat
with yellow gleaming eyes. In its mouth it held a young thrush, still
alive.

Then horror woke in him: his feeling of sick-faintness was there, and he
loathed and was terrified at this dreadful feline glee in the torture of
its prey, a glee so great that it preferred the postponement of its
meal to a shortening of the other. More than all, the resemblance of the
eyes of this cat to those of his portrait suddenly struck him as
something hellish. For one moment this all held him bound, as if with
paralysis, the next his physical shuddering could be withstood no
longer, and he threw the glass he carried at the cat, missing it. For
one second the animal paused there glaring at him with an intense and
dreadful hostility, then it made one spring of it out of the open
window. Dick shut it with a bang that startled himself, and then
searched on the sofa and the floor for the bird which he thought the cat
had dropped. Once or twice he thought he heard it feebly fluttering, but
this must have been an illusion, for he could not find it.

All this was rather shaky business, so before going to bed he steadied
himself, as his unspoken phrase ran, with a final drink. Outside the
thunder had ceased, but the rain beat hissing on to the grass. Then
another sound mingled with it, the mewing of a cat, not the long drawn
screeches and cries that are usual, but the plaintive calls of the beast
that wants to be admitted into its own home. The blind was down, but
after a while he could not resist peeping out. There on the window-sill
was seated the large grey cat. Though it was raining heavily its fur
seemed dry, for it was standing stiffly away from its body. But when it
saw him it spat at him, scratching angrily at the glass, and vanished.

Lady Madingley ... heavens, how he had loved her! And, infernally as she
had treated him, how passionately he wanted her now. Was all his trouble
then to begin over again? Had that nightmare dawned anew on him? It was
the cat’s fault: the eyes of the cat had done it. Yet just now all his
desire was blurred by this dullness of brain that was as unaccountable
as the re-awakening of his desire. For months now he had drunk far more
than he had drunk to-day, yet evening had seen him clear-headed, acute,
master of himself, and revelling in the liberty that had come to him,
and in the cool joy of creative vision. But to-night he stumbled and
groped across the room.

The neutral-coloured light of dawn awoke him, and he got up at once,
feeling still very drowsy, but in answer to some silent imperative call.
The storm had altogether passed away, and a jewel of a morning star hung
in a pale heaven. His room looked strangely unfamiliar to him, his own
sensations were unfamiliar, there was a vagueness about things, a
barrier between him and the world. One desire alone possessed him, to
finish the portrait. All else, so he felt, he left to chance, or
whatever laws regulate the world, those laws which choose that a certain
thrush shall be caught by a certain cat, and choose one scapegoat out of
a thousand, and let the rest go free.

Two hours later his servant called him, and found him gone from his
room. So as the morning was so fair, he went out to lay breakfast in the
shelter. The portrait was there, it had been dragged back into position
by the clematis, but it was covered with strange scratches, as if the
claws of some enraged animal or the nails perhaps of a man had furiously
attacked it. Dick Alingham was there, too, lying very still in front of
the disfigured canvas. Claws, also, or nails had attacked him, his
throat was horribly mangled by them. But his hands were covered with
paint, the nails of his fingers too were choked with it.




THE BUS-CONDUCTOR


My friend, Hugh Grainger, and I had just returned from a two days’ visit
in the country, where we had been staying in a house of sinister repute
which was supposed to be haunted by ghosts of a peculiarly fearsome and
truculent sort. The house itself was all that such a house should be,
Jacobean and oak-panelled, with long dark passages and high vaulted
rooms. It stood, also, very remote, and was encompassed by a wood of
sombre pines that muttered and whispered in the dark, and all the time
that we were there a south-westerly gale with torrents of scolding rain
had prevailed, so that by day and night weird voices moaned and fluted
in the chimneys, a company of uneasy spirits held colloquy among the
trees, and sudden tattoes and tappings beckoned from the window-panes.
But in spite of these surroundings, which were sufficient in themselves,
one would almost say, to spontaneously generate occult phenomena,
nothing of any description had occurred. I am bound to add, also, that
my own state of mind was peculiarly well adapted to receive or even to
invent the sights and sounds we had gone to seek, for I was, I confess,
during the whole time that we were there, in a state of abject
apprehension, and lay awake both nights through hours of terrified
unrest, afraid of the dark, yet more afraid of what a lighted candle
might show me.

Hugh Grainger, on the evening after our return to town, had dined with
me, and after dinner our conversation, as was natural, soon came back to
these entrancing topics.

“But why you go ghost-seeking I cannot imagine,” he said, “because your
teeth were chattering and your eyes starting out of your head all the
time you were there, from sheer fright. Or do you like being
frightened?”

Hugh, though generally intelligent, is dense in certain ways; this is
one of them.

“Why, of course, I like being frightened,” I said. “I want to be made to
creep and creep and creep. Fear is the most absorbing and luxurious of
emotions. One forgets all else if one is afraid.”

“Well, the fact that neither of us saw anything,” he said, “confirms
what I have always believed.”

“And what have you always believed?”

“That these phenomena are purely objective, not subjective, and that
one’s state of mind has nothing to do with the perception that perceives
them, nor have circumstances or surroundings anything to do with them
either. Look at Osburton. It has had the reputation of being a haunted
house for years, and it certainly has all the accessories of one. Look
at yourself, too, with all your nerves on edge, afraid to look round or
light a candle for fear of seeing something! Surely there was the right
man in the right place then, if ghosts are subjective.”

He got up and lit a cigarette, and looking at him--Hugh is about six
feet high, and as broad as he is long--I felt a retort on my lips, for I
could not help my mind going back to a certain period in his life, when,
from some cause which, as far as I knew, he had never told anybody, he
had become a mere quivering mass of disordered nerves. Oddly enough, at
the same moment and for the first time, he began, to speak of it
himself.

“You may reply that it was not worth my while to go either,” he said,
“because I was so clearly the wrong man in the wrong place. But I
wasn’t. You for all your apprehensions and expectancy have never seen a
ghost. But I have, though I am the last person in the world you would
have thought likely to do so, and, though my nerves are steady enough
again now, it knocked me all to bits.”

He sat down again in his chair.

“No doubt you remember my going to bits,” he said, “and since I believe
that I am sound again now, I should rather like to tell you about it.
But before I couldn’t; I couldn’t speak of it at all to anybody. Yet
there ought to have been nothing frightening about it; what I saw was
certainly a most useful and friendly ghost. But it came from the shaded
side of things; it looked suddenly out of the night and the mystery with
which life is surrounded.”

“I want first to tell you quite shortly my theory about ghost-seeing,”
he continued, “and I can explain it best by a simile, an image. Imagine
then that you and I and everybody in the world are like people whose eye
is directly opposite a little tiny hole in a sheet of cardboard which is
continually shifting and revolving and moving about. Back to back with
that sheet of cardboard is another, which also, by laws of its own, is
in perpetual but independent motion. In it too there is another hole,
and when, fortuitously it would seem, these two holes, the one through
which we are always looking, and the other in the spiritual plane, come
opposite one another, we see through, and then only do the sights and
sounds of the spiritual world become visible or audible to us. With most
people these holes never come opposite each other during their life. But
at the hour of death they do, and then they remain stationary. That, I
fancy, is how we ‘pass over.’

“Now, in some natures, these holes are comparatively large, and are
constantly coming into opposition. Clairvoyants, mediums are like that.
But, as far as I knew, I had no clairvoyant or mediumistic powers at
all. I therefore am the sort of person who long ago made up his mind
that he never would see a ghost. It was, so to speak, an incalculable
chance that my minute spy-hole should come into opposition with the
other. But it did: and it knocked me out of time.”

I had heard some such theory before, and though Hugh put it rather
picturesquely, there was nothing in the least convincing or practical
about it. It might be so, or again it might not.

“I hope your ghost was more original than your theory,” said I, in order
to bring him to the point.

“Yes, I think it was. You shall judge.”

I put on more coal and poked up the fire. Hugh has got, so I have always
considered, a great talent for telling stories, and that sense of drama
which is so necessary for the narrator. Indeed before now, I have
suggested to him that he should take this up as a profession, sit by the
fountain in Piccadilly Circus, when times are, as usual, bad, and tell
stories to the passers-by in the street, Arabian fashion, for reward.
The most part of mankind, I am aware, do not like long stories, but to
the few, among whom I number myself, who really like to listen to
lengthy accounts of experiences, Hugh is an ideal narrator. I do not
care for his theories, or for his similes, but when it comes to facts,
to things that happened, I like him to be lengthy.

“Go on, please, and slowly,” I said. “Brevity may be the soul of wit,
but it is the ruin of storytelling. I want to hear when and where and
how it all was, and what you had for lunch and where you had dined and
what----”

Hugh began:

“It was the 24th of June, just eighteen months ago,” he said. “I had let
my flat, you may remember, and came up from the country to stay with you
for a week. We had dined alone here----”

I could not help interrupting.

“Did you see the ghost here?” I asked. “In this square little box of a
house in a modern street?”

“I was in the house when I saw it.”

I hugged myself in silence.

“We had dined alone here in Graeme Street,” he said, “and after dinner I
went out to some party, and you stopped at home. At dinner your man did
not wait, and when I asked where he was, you told me he was ill, and, I
thought, changed the subject rather abruptly. You gave me your latch-key
when I went out, and on coming back, I found you had gone to bed. There
were, however, several letters for me, which required answers. I wrote
them there and then, and posted them at the pillar-box opposite. So I
suppose it was rather late when I went upstairs.

“You had put me in the front room, on the third floor, overlooking the
street, a room which I thought you generally occupied yourself. It was a
very hot night, and though there had been a moon when I started to my
party, on my return the whole sky was cloud-covered, and it both looked
and felt as if we might have a thunderstorm before morning. I was
feeling very sleepy and heavy, and it was not till after I had got into
bed that I noticed by the shadows of the window-frames on the blind that
only one of the windows was open. But it did not seem worth while to get
out of bed in order to open it, though I felt rather airless and
uncomfortable, and I went to sleep.

“What time it was when I awoke I do not know, but it was certainly not
yet dawn, and I never remember being conscious of such an extraordinary
stillness as prevailed. There was no sound either of foot-passengers or
wheeled traffic; the music of life appeared to be absolutely mute. But
now instead of being sleepy and heavy, I felt, though I must have slept
an hour or two at most, since it was not yet dawn, perfectly fresh and
wide-awake, and the effort which had seemed not worth making before,
that of getting out of bed and opening the other window, was quite easy
now, and I pulled up the blind, threw it wide open, and leaned out, for
somehow I parched and pined for air. Even outside the oppression was
very noticeable, and though, as you know, I am not easily given to feel
the mental effects of climate, I was aware of an awful creepiness coming
over me. I tried to analyse it away, but without success; the past day
had been pleasant, I looked forward to another pleasant day to-morrow,
and yet I was full of some nameless apprehension. I felt, too,
dreadfully lonely in this stillness before the dawn.

“Then I heard suddenly and not very far away the sound of some
approaching vehicle; I could distinguish the tread of two horses walking
at a slow foot’s pace. They were, though yet invisible, coming up the
street, and yet this indication of life did not abate that dreadful
sense of loneliness which I have spoken of. Also in some dim
unformulated way that which was coming seemed to me to have something to
do with the cause of my oppression.

“Then the vehicle came into sight. At first I could not distinguish what
it was. Then I saw that the horses were black and had long tails, and
that what they dragged was made of glass, but had a black frame. It was
a hearse. Empty.

“It was moving up this side of the street. It stopped at your door.

“Then the obvious solution struck me. You had said at dinner that your
man was ill, and you were, I thought, unwilling to speak more about his
illness. No doubt, so I imagined now, he was dead, and for some reason,
perhaps because you did not want me to know anything about it, you were
having the body removed at night. This, I must tell you, passed through
my mind quite instantaneously, and it did not occur to me how unlikely
it really was, before the next thing happened.

“I was still leaning out of the window, and I remember also wondering,
yet only momentarily, how odd it was that I saw things--or rather the
one thing I was looking at--so very distinctly. Of course, there was a
moon behind the clouds, but it was curious how every detail of the
hearse and the horses was visible. There was only one man, the driver,
with it, and the street was otherwise absolutely empty. It was at him I
was looking now. I could see every detail of his clothes, but from where
I was, so high above him, I could not see his face. He had on grey
trousers, brown boots, a black coat buttoned all the way up, and a straw
hat. Over his shoulder there was a strap, which seemed to support some
sort of little bag. He looked exactly like--well, from my description
what did he look exactly like?”

“Why--a bus-conductor,” I said instantly.

“So I thought, and even while I was thinking this, he looked up at me.
He had a rather long thin face, and on his left cheek there was a mole
with a growth of dark hair on it. All this was as distinct as if it had
been noonday, and as if I was within a yard of him. But--so
instantaneous was all that takes so long in the telling--I had not time
to think it strange that the driver of a hearse should be so
unfunereally dressed.

“Then he touched his hat to me, and jerked his thumb over his shoulder.”

“‘Just room for one inside, sir,’ he said.

“There was something so odious, so coarse, so unfeeling about this that
I instantly drew my head in, pulled the blind down again, and then, for
what reason I do not know, turned on the electric light in order to see
what time it was. The hands of my watch pointed to half-past eleven.

“It was then for the first time, I think, that a doubt crossed my mind
as to the nature of what I had just seen. But I put out the light again,
got into bed, and began to think. We had dined; I had gone to a party, I
had come back and written letters, had gone to bed and had slept. So how
could it be half-past eleven?... Or--_what_ half-past eleven was it?

“Then another easy solution struck me; my watch must have stopped. But
it had not; I could hear it ticking.

“There was stillness and silence again. I expected every moment to hear
muffled footsteps on the stairs, footsteps moving slowly and smally
under the weight of a heavy burden, but from inside the house there was
no sound whatever. Outside, too, there was the same dead silence, while
the hearse waited at the door. And the minutes ticked on and ticked on,
and at length I began to see a difference in the light in the room, and
knew that the dawn was beginning to break outside. But how had it
happened then that if the corpse was to be removed at night it had not
gone, and that the hearse still waited, when morning was already coming?

“Presently I got out of bed again, and with the sense of strong physical
shrinking I went to the window and pulled back the blind. The dawn was
coming fast; the whole street was lit by that silver hueless light of
morning. But there was no hearse there.

“Once again I looked at my watch. It was just a quarter-past four. But I
would swear that not half an hour had passed since it had told me that
it was half-past eleven.

“Then a curious double sense, as if I was living in the present and at
the same moment had been living in some other time, came over me. It was
dawn on June 25th, and the street, as natural, was empty. But a little
while ago the driver of a hearse had spoken to me, and it was half-past
eleven. What was that driver, to what plane did he belong? And again
_what_ half-past eleven was it that I had seen recorded on the dial of
my watch?

“And then I told myself that the whole thing had been a dream. But if
you ask me whether I believed what I told myself, I must confess that I
did not.

“Your man did not appear at breakfast next morning, nor did I see him
again before I left that afternoon. I think if I had, I should have told
you about all this, but it was still possible, you see, that what I had
seen was a real hearse, driven by a real driver, for all the ghastly
gaiety of the face that had looked up to mine, and the levity of his
pointing hand. I might possibly have fallen asleep soon after seeing
him, and slumbered through the removal of the body and the departure of
the hearse. So I did not speak of it to you.”

       *       *       *       *       *

There was something wonderfully straightforward and prosaic in all this;
here were no Jacobean houses oak-panelled and surrounded by weeping
pine-trees, and somehow the very absence of suitable surroundings made
the story more impressive. But for a moment a doubt assailed me.

“Don’t tell me it was all a dream,” I said.

“I don’t know whether it was or not. I can only say that I believe
myself to have been wide awake. In any case the rest of the story
is--odd.”

“I went out of town again that afternoon,” he continued, “and I may say
that I don’t think that even for a moment did I get the haunting sense
of what I had seen or dreamed that night out of my mind. It was present
to me always as some vision unfulfilled. It was as if some clock had
struck the four quarters, and I was still waiting to hear what the hour
would be.

“Exactly a month afterwards I was in London again, but only for the day.
I arrived at Victoria about eleven, and took the underground to Sloane
Square in order to see if you were in town and would give me lunch. It
was a baking hot morning, and I intended to take a bus from the King’s
Road as far as Graeme Street. There was one standing at the corner just
as I came out of the station, but I saw that the top was full, and the
inside appeared to be full also. Just as I came up to it the conductor
who, I suppose, had been inside, collecting fares or what not, came out
on to the step within a few feet of me. He wore grey trousers, brown
boots, a black coat buttoned, a straw hat, and over his shoulder was a
strap on which hung his little machine for punching tickets. I saw his
face, too; it was the face of the driver of the hearse, with a mole on
the left cheek. Then he spoke to me, jerking his thumb over his
shoulder.

“‘Just room for one inside, sir,’ he said.

“At that a sort of panic-terror took possession of me, and I knew I
gesticulated wildly with my arms, and cried, ‘No, no!’ But at that
moment I was living not in the hour that was then passing, but in that
hour which had passed a month ago, when I leaned from the window of your
bedroom here just before the dawn broke. At this moment too I knew that
my spy-hole had been opposite the spy-hole into the spiritual world.
What I had seen there had some significance, now being fulfilled, beyond
the significance of the trivial happenings of to-day and to-morrow. The
Powers of which we know so little were visibly working before me. And I
stood there on the pavement shaking and trembling.

“I was opposite the post-office at the corner, and just as the bus
started my eye fell on the clock in the window there. I need not tell
you what the time was.

“Perhaps I need not tell you the rest, for you probably conjecture it,
since you will not have forgotten what happened at the corner of Sloane
Square at the end of July, the summer before last. The bus pulled out
from the pavement into the street in order to get round a van that was
standing in front of it. At the moment there came down the King’s Road a
big motor going at a hideously dangerous pace. It crashed full into the
bus, burrowing into it as a gimlet burrows into a board.”

He paused.

“And that’s my story,” he said.




THE MAN WHO WENT TOO FAR


The little village of St Faith’s nestles in a hollow of wooded hill up
on the north bank of the river Fawn in the county of Hampshire, huddling
close round its grey Norman church as if for spiritual protection
against the fays and fairies, the trolls and “little people,” who might
be supposed still to linger in the vast empty spaces of the New Forest,
and to come after dusk and do their doubtful businesses. Once outside
the hamlet you may walk in any direction (so long as you avoid the high
road which leads to Brockenhurst) for the length of a summer afternoon
without seeing sign of human habitation, or possibly even catching sight
of another human being. Shaggy wild ponies may stop their feeding for a
moment as you pass, the white scuts of rabbits will vanish into their
burrows, a brown viper perhaps will glide from your path into a clump of
heather, and unseen birds will chuckle in the bushes, but it may easily
happen that for a long day you will see nothing human. But you will not
feel in the least lonely; in summer, at any rate, the sunlight will be
gay with butterflies, and the air thick with all those woodland sounds
which like instruments in an orchestra combine to play the great
symphony of the yearly festival of June. Winds whisper in the birches,
and sigh among the firs; bees are busy with their redolent labour among
the heather, a myriad birds chirp in the green temples of the forest
trees, and the voice of the river prattling over stony places, bubbling
into pools, chuckling and gulping round corners, gives you the sense
that many presences and companions are near at hand.

Yet, oddly enough, though one would have thought that these benign and
cheerful influences of wholesome air and spaciousness of forest were
very healthful comrades for a man, in so far as nature can really
influence this wonderful human genus which has in these centuries
learned to defy her most violent storms in its well-established houses,
to bridle her torrents and make them light its streets, to tunnel her
mountains and plough her seas, the inhabitants of St Faith’s will not
willingly venture into the forest after dark. For in spite of the
silence and loneliness of the hooded night it seems that a man is not
sure in what company he may suddenly find himself, and though it is
difficult to get from these villagers any very clear story of occult
appearances, the feeling is widespread. One story indeed I have heard
with some definiteness, the tale of a monstrous goat that has been seen
to skip with hellish glee about the woods and shady places, and this
perhaps is connected with the story which I have here attempted to
piece together. It too is well-known to them; for all remember the young
artist who died here not long ago, a young man, or so he struck the
beholder, of great personal beauty, with something about him that made
men’s faces to smile and brighten when they looked on him. His ghost
they will tell you “walks” constantly by the stream and through the
woods which he loved so, and in especial it haunts a certain house, the
last of the village, where he lived, and its garden in which he was done
to death. For my part I am inclined to think that the terror of the
Forest dates chiefly from that day. So, such as the story is, I have set
it forth in connected form. It is based partly on the accounts of the
villagers, but mainly on that of Darcy, a friend of mine and a friend of
the man with whom these events were chiefly concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day had been one of untarnished midsummer splendour, and as the sun
drew near to its setting, the glory of the evening grew every moment
more crystalline, more miraculous. Westward from St Faith’s the
beechwood which stretched for some miles toward the heathery upland
beyond already cast its veil of clear shadow over the red roofs of the
village, but the spire of the grey church, overtopping all, still
pointed a flaming orange finger into the sky. The river Fawn, which runs
below, lay in sheets of sky-reflected blue, and wound its dreamy
devious course round the edge of this wood, where a rough two-planked
bridge crossed from the bottom of the garden of the last house in the
village, and communicated by means of a little wicker gate with the wood
itself. Then once out of the shadow of the wood the stream lay in
flaming pools of the molten crimson of the sunset, and lost itself in
the haze of woodland distances.

This house at the end of the village stood outside the shadow, and the
lawn which sloped down to the river was still flecked with sunlight.
Garden-beds of dazzling colour lined its gravel walks, and down the
middle of it ran a brick pergola, half-hidden in clusters of
rambler-rose and purple with starry clematis. At the bottom end of it,
between two of its pillars, was slung a hammock containing a
shirt-sleeved figure.

The house itself lay somewhat remote from the rest of the village, and a
footpath leading across two fields, now tall and fragrant with hay, was
its only communication with the high road. It was low-built, only two
stories in height, and like the garden, its walls were a mass of
flowering roses. A narrow stone terrace ran along the garden front, over
which was stretched an awning, and on the terrace a young silent-footed
man-servant was busied with the laying of the table for dinner. He was
neat-handed and quick with his job, and having finished it he went back
into the house, and reappeared again with a large rough bath-towel on
his arm. With this he went to the hammock in the pergola.

“Nearly eight, sir,” he said.

“Has Mr Darcy come yet?” asked a voice from the hammock.

“No, sir.”

“If I’m not back when he comes, tell him that I’m just having a bathe
before dinner.”

The servant went back to the house, and after a moment or two Frank
Halton struggled to a sitting posture, and slipped out on to the grass.
He was of medium height and rather slender in build, but the supple ease
and grace of his movements gave the impression of great physical
strength: even his descent from the hammock was not an awkward
performance. His face and hands were of very dark complexion, either
from constant exposure to wind and sun, or, as his black hair and dark
eyes tended to show, from some strain of southern blood. His head was
small, his face of an exquisite beauty of modelling, while the
smoothness of its contour would have led you to believe that he was a
beardless lad still in his teens. But something, some look which living
and experience alone can give, seemed to contradict that, and finding
yourself completely puzzled as to his age, you would next moment
probably cease to think about that, and only look at this glorious
specimen of young manhood with wondering satisfaction.

He was dressed as became the season and the heat, and wore only a shirt
open at the neck, and a pair of flannel trousers. His head, covered very
thickly with a somewhat rebellious crop of short curly hair, was bare as
he strolled across the lawn to the bathing-place that lay below. Then
for a moment there was silence, then the sound of splashed and divided
waters, and presently after, a great shout of ecstatic joy, as he swam
up-stream with the foamed water standing in a frill round his neck. Then
after some five minutes of limb-stretching struggle with the flood, he
turned over on his back, and with arms thrown wide, floated down-stream,
ripple-cradled and inert. His eyes were shut, and between half-parted
lips he talked gently to himself.

“I am one with it,” he said to himself, “the river and I, I and the
river. The coolness and splash of it is I, and the water-herbs that wave
in it are I also. And my strength and my limbs are not mine but the
river’s. It is all one, all one, dear Fawn.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A quarter of an hour later he appeared again at the bottom of the lawn,
dressed as before, his wet hair already drying into its crisp short
curls again. There he paused a moment, looking back at the stream with
the smile with which men look on the face of a friend, then turned
towards the house. Simultaneously his servant came to the door leading
on to the terrace, followed by a man who appeared to be some half-way
through the fourth decade of his years. Frank and he saw each other
across the bushes and garden-beds, and each quickening his step, they
met suddenly face to face round an angle of the garden walk, in the
fragrance of syringa.

“My dear Darcy,” cried Frank, “I am charmed to see you.”

But the other stared at him in amazement.

“Frank!” he exclaimed.

“Yes, that is my name,” he said laughing, “what is the matter?”

Darcy took his hand.

“What have you done to yourself?” he asked. “You are a boy again.”

“Ah, I have a lot to tell you,” said Frank. “Lots that you will hardly
believe, but I shall convince you----”

He broke off suddenly, and held up his hand.

“Hush, there is my nightingale,” he said.

The smile of recognition and welcome with which he had greeted his
friend faded from his face, and a look of rapt wonder took its place, as
of a lover listening to the voice of his beloved. His mouth parted
slightly, showing the white line of teeth, and his eyes looked out and
out till they seemed to Darcy to be focussed on things beyond the vision
of man. Then something perhaps startled the bird, for the song ceased.

“Yes, lots to tell you,” he said. “Really I am delighted to see you.
But you look rather white and pulled down; no wonder after that fever.
And there is to be no nonsense about this visit. It is June now, you
stop here till you are fit to begin work again. Two months at least.”

“Ah, I can’t trespass quite to that extent.”

Frank took his arm and walked him down the grass.

“Trespass? Who talks of trespass? I shall tell you quite openly when I
am tired of you, but you know when we had the studio together, we used
not to bore each other. However, it is ill talking of going away on the
moment of your arrival. Just a stroll to the river, and then it will be
dinner-time.”

Darcy took out his cigarette case, and offered it to the other.

Frank laughed.

“No, not for me. Dear me, I suppose I used to smoke once. How very odd!”

“Given it up?”

“I don’t know. I suppose I must have. Anyhow I don’t do it now. I would
as soon think of eating meat.”

“Another victim on the smoking altar of vegetarianism?”

“Victim?” asked Frank. “Do I strike you as such?”

He paused on the margin of the stream and whistled softly. Next moment a
moor-hen made its splashing flight across the river, and ran up the
bank. Frank took it very gently in his hands and stroked its head, as
the creature lay against his shirt.

“And is the house among the reeds still secure?” he half-crooned to it.
“And is the missus quite well, and are the neighbours flourishing?
There, dear, home with you,” and he flung it into the air.

“That bird’s very tame,” said Darcy, slightly bewildered.

“It is rather,” said Frank, following its flight.

       *       *       *       *       *

During dinner Frank chiefly occupied himself in bringing himself
up-to-date in the movements and achievements of this old friend whom he
had not seen for six years. Those six years, it now appeared, had been
full of incident and success for Darcy; he had made a name for himself
as a portrait painter which bade fair to outlast the vogue of a couple
of seasons, and his leisure time had been brief. Then some four months
previously he had been through a severe attack of typhoid, the result of
which as concerns this story was that he had come down to this
sequestered place to recruit.

“Yes, you’ve got on,” said Frank at the end. “I always knew you would.
A.R.A. with more in prospect. Money? You roll in it, I suppose, and, O
Darcy, how much happiness have you had all these years? That is the only
imperishable possession. And how much have you learned? Oh, I don’t mean
in Art. Even I could have done well in that.”

Darcy laughed.

“Done well? My dear fellow, all I have learned in these six years you
knew, so to speak, in your cradle. Your old pictures fetch huge prices.
Do you never paint now?”

Frank shook his head.

“No, I’m too busy,” he said.

“Doing what? Please tell me. That is what everyone is for ever asking
me.”

“Doing? I suppose you would say I do nothing.”

Darcy glanced up at the brilliant young face opposite him.

“It seems to suit you, that way of being busy,” he said. “Now, it’s your
turn. Do you read? Do you study? I remember you saying that it would do
us all--all us artists, I mean--a great deal of good if we would study
any one human face carefully for a year, without recording a line. Have
you been doing that?”

Frank shook his head again.

“I mean exactly what I say,” he said, “I have been _doing_ nothing. And
I have never been so occupied. Look at me; have I not done something to
myself to begin with?”

“You are two years younger than I,” said Darcy, “at least you used to
be. You therefore are thirty-five. But had I never seen you before I
should say you were just twenty. But was it worth while to spend six
years of greatly-occupied life in order to look twenty? Seems rather
like a woman of fashion.”

Frank laughed boisterously.

“First time I’ve ever been compared to that particular bird of prey,” he
said. “No, that has not been my occupation--in fact I am only very
rarely conscious that one effect of my occupation has been that. Of
course, it must have been if one comes to think of it. It is not very
important. Quite true my body has become young. But that is very little;
I have become young.”

Darcy pushed back his chair and sat sideways to the table looking at the
other.

“Has that been your occupation then?” he asked.

“Yes, that anyhow is one aspect of it. Think what youth means! It is the
capacity for growth, mind, body, spirit, all grow, all get stronger, all
have a fuller, firmer life every day. That is something, considering
that every day that passes after the ordinary man reaches the full-blown
flower of his strength, weakens his hold on life. A man reaches his
prime, and remains, we say, in his prime, for ten years, or perhaps
twenty. But after his primest prime is reached, he slowly, insensibly
weakens. These are the signs of age in you, in your body, in your art
probably, in your mind. You are less electric than you were. But I, when
I reach my prime--I am nearing it--ah, you shall see.”

The stars had begun to appear in the blue velvet of the sky, and to the
east the horizon seen above the black silhouette of the village was
growing dove-coloured with the approach of moon-rise. White moths
hovered dimly over the garden-beds, and the footsteps of night tip-toed
through the bushes. Suddenly Frank rose.

“Ah, it is the supreme moment,” he said softly. “Now more than at any
other time the current of life, the eternal imperishable current runs so
close to me that I am almost enveloped in it. Be silent a minute.”

He advanced to the edge of the terrace and looked out standing stretched
with arms outspread. Darcy heard him draw a long breath into his lungs,
and after many seconds expel it again. Six or eight times he did this,
then turned back into the lamplight.

“It will sound to you quite mad, I expect,” he said, “but if you want to
hear the soberest truth I have ever spoken and shall ever speak, I will
tell you about myself. But come into the garden if it is not too damp
for you. I have never told anyone yet, but I shall like to tell you. It
is long, in fact, since I have even tried to classify what I have
learned.”

They wandered into the fragrant dimness of the pergola, and sat down.
Then Frank began:

“Years ago, do you remember,” he said, “we used often to talk about the
decay of joy in the world. Many impulses, we settled, had contributed
to this decay, some of which were good in themselves, others that were
quite completely bad. Among the good things, I put what we may call
certain Christian virtues, renunciation, resignation, sympathy with
suffering, and the desire to relieve sufferers. But out of those things
spring very bad ones, useless renunciations, asceticism for its own
sake, mortification of the flesh with nothing to follow, no
corresponding gain that is, and that awful and terrible disease which
devastated England some centuries ago, and from which by heredity of
spirit we suffer now, Puritanism. That was a dreadful plague, the brutes
held and taught that joy and laughter and merriment were evil: it was a
doctrine the most profane and wicked. Why, what is the commonest crime
one sees? A sullen face. That is the truth of the matter.

“Now all my life I have believed that we are intended to be happy, that
joy is of all gifts the most divine. And when I left London, abandoned
my career, such as it was, I did so because I intended to devote my life
to the cultivation of joy, and, by continuous and unsparing effort, to
be happy. Among people, and in constant intercourse with others, I did
not find it possible; there were too many distractions in towns and
work-rooms, and also too much suffering. So I took one step backwards or
forwards, as you may choose to put it, and went straight to Nature, to
trees, birds, animals, to all those things which quite clearly pursue
one aim only, which blindly follow the great native instinct to be happy
without any care at all for morality, or human law or divine law. I
wanted, you understand, to get all joy first-hand and unadulterated, and
I think it scarcely exists among men; it is obsolete.”

Darcy turned in his chair.

“Ah, but what makes birds and animals happy?” he asked. “Food, food and
mating.”

Frank laughed gently in the stillness.

“Do not think I became a sensualist,” he said. “I did not make that
mistake. For the sensualist carries his miseries pick-a-back, and round
his feet is wound the shroud that shall soon enwrap him. I may be mad,
it is true, but I am not so stupid anyhow as to have tried that. No,
what is it that makes puppies play with their own tails, that sends cats
on their prowling ecstatic errands at night?”

He paused a moment.

“So I went to Nature,” he said. “I sat down here in this New Forest, sat
down fair and square, and looked. That was my first difficulty, to sit
here quiet without being bored, to wait without being impatient, to be
receptive and very alert, though for a long time nothing particular
happened. The change in fact was slow in those early stages.”

“Nothing happened?” asked Darcy rather impatiently, with the sturdy
revolt against any new idea which to the English mind is synonymous
with nonsense. “Why, what in the world _should_ happen?”

Now Frank as he had known him was the most generous but most
quick-tempered of mortal men; in other words his anger would flare to a
prodigious beacon, under almost no provocation, only to be quenched
again under a gust of no less impulsive kindliness. Thus the moment
Darcy had spoken, an apology for his hasty question was half-way up his
tongue. But there was no need for it to have travelled even so far, for
Frank laughed again with kindly, genuine mirth.

“Oh, how I should have resented that a few years ago,” he said. “Thank
goodness that resentment is one of the things I have got rid of. I
certainly wish that you should believe my story--in fact, you are going
to--but that you at this moment should imply that you do not, does not
concern me.”

“Ah, your solitary sojournings have made you inhuman,” said Darcy, still
very English.

“No, human,” said Frank. “Rather more human, at least rather less of an
ape.”

“Well, that was my first quest,” he continued, after a moment, “the
deliberate and unswerving pursuit of joy, and my method, the eager
contemplation of Nature. As far as motive went, I daresay it was purely
selfish, but as far as effect goes, it seems to me about the best thing
one can do for one’s fellow-creatures, for happiness is more infectious
than small-pox. So, as I said, I sat down and waited; I looked at happy
things, zealously avoided the sight of anything unhappy, and by degrees
a little trickle of the happiness of this blissful world began to filter
into me. The trickle grew more abundant, and now, my dear fellow, if I
could for a moment divert from me into you one half of the torrent of
joy that pours through me day and night, you would throw the world, art,
everything aside, and just live, exist. When a man’s body dies, it
passes into trees and flowers. Well, that is what I have been trying to
do with my soul before death.”

The servant had brought into the pergola a table with syphons and
spirits, and had set a lamp upon it. As Frank spoke he leaned forward
towards the other, and Darcy for all his matter-of-fact common-sense
could have sworn that his companion’s face shone, was luminous in
itself. His dark brown eyes glowed from within, the unconscious smile of
a child irradiated and transformed his face. Darcy felt suddenly
excited, exhilarated.

“Go on,” he said. “Go on. I can feel you are somehow telling me sober
truth. I daresay you are mad; but I don’t see that matters.”

Frank laughed again.

“Mad?” he said. “Yes, certainly, if you wish. But I prefer to call it
sane. However, nothing matters less than what anybody chooses to call
things. God never labels his gifts; He just puts them into our hands;
just as he put animals in the garden of Eden, for Adam to name if he
felt disposed.”

“So by the continual observance and study of things that were happy,”
continued he, “I got happiness, I got joy. But seeking it, as I did,
from Nature, I got much more which I did not seek, but stumbled upon
originally by accident. It is difficult to explain, but I will try.

“About three years ago I was sitting one morning in a place I will show
you to-morrow. It is down by the river brink, very green, dappled with
shade and sun, and the river passes there through some little clumps of
reeds. Well, as I sat there, doing nothing, but just looking and
listening, I heard the sound quite distinctly of some flute-like
instrument playing a strange unending melody. I thought at first it was
some musical yokel on the highway and did not pay much attention. But
before long the strangeness and indescribable beauty of the tune struck
me. It never repeated itself, but it never came to an end, phrase after
phrase ran its sweet course, it worked gradually and inevitably up to a
climax, and having attained it, it went on; another climax was reached
and another and another. Then with a sudden gasp of wonder I localised
where it came from. It came from the reeds and from the sky and from the
trees. It was everywhere, it was the sound of life. It was, my dear
Darcy, as the Greeks would have said, it was Pan playing on his pipes,
the voice of Nature. It was the life-melody, the world-melody.”

Darcy was far too interested to interrupt, though there was a question
he would have liked to ask, and Frank went on:

“Well, for the moment I was terrified, terrified with the impotent
horror of nightmare, and I stopped my ears and just ran from the place
and got back to the house panting, trembling, literally in a panic.
Unknowingly, for at that time I only pursued joy, I had begun, since I
drew my joy from Nature, to get in touch with Nature. Nature, force,
God, call it what you will, had drawn across my face a little gossamer
web of essential life. I saw that when I emerged from my terror, and I
went very humbly back to where I had heard the Pan-pipes. But it was
nearly six months before I heard them again.”

“Why was that?” asked Darcy.

“Surely because I had revolted, rebelled, and worst of all been
frightened. For I believe that just as there is nothing in the world
which so injures one’s body as fear, so there is nothing that so much
shuts up the soul. I was afraid, you see, of the one thing in the world
which has real existence. No wonder its manifestation was withdrawn.”

“And after six months?”

“After six months one blessed morning I heard the piping again. I wasn’t
afraid that time. And since then it has grown louder, it has become more
constant. I now hear it often, and I can put myself into such an
attitude towards Nature that the pipes will almost certainly sound. And
never yet have they played the same tune, it is always something new,
something fuller, richer, more complete than before.”

“What do you mean by ‘such an attitude towards Nature’?” asked Darcy.

“I can’t explain that; but by translating it into a bodily attitude it
is this.”

Frank sat up for a moment quite straight in his chair, then slowly sunk
back with arms outspread and head drooped.

“That;” he said, “an effortless attitude, but open, resting, receptive.
It is just that which you must do with your soul.”

Then he sat up again.

“One word more,” he said, “and I will bore you no further. Nor unless
you ask me questions shall I talk about it again. You will find me, in
fact, quite sane in my mode of life. Birds and beasts, you will see
behaving somewhat intimately to me, like that moor-hen, but that is all.
I will walk with you, ride with you, play golf with you, and talk with
you on any subject you like. But I wanted you on the threshold to know
what has happened to me. And one thing more will happen.”

He paused again, and a slight look of fear crossed his eyes.

“There will be a final revelation,” he said, “a complete and blinding
stroke which will throw open to me, once and for all, the full
knowledge, the full realisation and comprehension that I am one, just as
you are, with life. In reality there is no ‘me,’ no ‘you,’ no ‘it.’
Everything is part of the one and only thing which is life. I know that
that is so, but the realisation of it is not yet mine. But it will be,
and on that day, so I take it, I shall see Pan. It may mean death, the
death of my body, that is, but I don’t care. It may mean immortal,
eternal life lived here and now and for ever. Then having gained that,
ah, my dear Darcy, I shall preach such a gospel of joy, showing myself
as the living proof of the truth, that Puritanism, the dismal religion
of sour faces, shall vanish like a breath of smoke, and be dispersed and
disappear in the sunlit air. But first the full knowledge must be mine.”

Darcy watched his face narrowly.

“You are afraid of that moment,” he said.

Frank smiled at him.

“Quite true; you are quick to have seen that. But when it comes I hope I
shall not be afraid.”

For some little time there was silence; then Darcy rose.

“You have bewitched me, you extraordinary boy,” he said. “You have been
telling me a fairy-story, and I find myself saying, ‘Promise me it is
true.’”

“I promise you that,” said the other.

“And I know I shan’t sleep,” added Darcy.

Frank looked at him with a sort of mild wonder as if he scarcely
understood.

“Well, what does that matter?” he said.

“I assure you it does. I am wretched unless I sleep.”

“Of course I can make you sleep if I want,” said Frank in a rather bored
voice.

“Well do.”

“Very good: go to bed. I’ll come upstairs in ten minutes.”

Frank busied himself for a little after the other had gone, moving the
table back under the awning of the verandah and quenching the lamp. Then
he went with his quick silent tread upstairs and into Darcy’s room. The
latter was already in bed, but very wide-eyed and wakeful, and Frank
with an amused smile of indulgence, as for a fretful child, sat down on
the edge of the bed.

“Look at me,” he said, and Darcy looked.

“The birds are sleeping in the brake,” said Frank softly, “and the winds
are asleep. The sea sleeps, and the tides are but the heaving of its
breast. The stars swing slow, rocked in the great cradle of the Heavens,
and----”

He stopped suddenly, gently blew out Darcy’s candle, and left him
sleeping.

Morning brought to Darcy a flood of hard common-sense, as clear and
crisp as the sunshine that filled his room. Slowly as he woke he
gathered together the broken threads of the memories of the evening
which had ended, so he told himself, in a trick of common hypnotism.
That accounted for it all; the whole strange talk he had had was under a
spell of suggestion from the extraordinary vivid boy who had once been a
man; all his own excitement, his acceptance of the incredible had been
merely the effect of a stronger, more potent will imposed on his own.
How strong that will was, he guessed from his own instantaneous
obedience to Frank’s suggestion of sleep. And armed with impenetrable
common-sense he came down to breakfast. Frank had already begun, and was
consuming a large plateful of porridge and milk with the most prosaic
and healthy appetite.

“Slept well?” he asked.

“Yes, of course. Where did you learn hypnotism?”

“By the side of the river.”

“You talked an amazing quantity of nonsense last night,” remarked Darcy,
in a voice prickly with reason.

“Rather. I felt quite giddy. Look, I remembered to order a dreadful
daily paper for you. You can read about money markets or politics or
cricket matches.”

Darcy looked at him closely. In the morning light Frank looked even
fresher, younger, more vital than he had done the night before, and the
sight of him somehow dinted Darcy’s armour of common-sense.

“You are the most extraordinary fellow I ever saw,” he said. “I want to
ask you some more questions.”

“Ask away,” said Frank.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next day or two Darcy plied his friend with many questions,
objections and criticisms on the theory of life and gradually got out of
him a coherent and complete account of his experience. In brief then,
Frank believed that “by lying naked,” as he put it, to the force which
controls the passage of the stars, the breaking of a wave, the budding
of a tree, the love of a youth and maiden, he had succeeded in a way
hitherto undreamed of in possessing himself of the essential principle
of life. Day by day, so he thought, he was getting nearer to, and in
closer union with the great power itself which caused all life to be,
the spirit of nature, of force, or the spirit of God. For himself, he
confessed to what others would call paganism; it was sufficient for him
that there existed a principle of life. He did not worship it, he did
not pray to it, he did not praise it. Some of it existed in all human
beings, just as it existed in trees and animals, to realise and make
living to himself the fact that it was all one, was his sole aim and
object.

Here perhaps Darcy would put in a word of warning.

“Take care,” he said. “To see Pan meant death, did it not.”

Frank’s eyebrows would rise at this.

“What does that matter?” he said. “True, the Greeks were always right,
and they said so, but there is another possibility. For the nearer I get
to it, the more living, the more vital and young I become.”

“What then do you expect the final revelation will do for you?”

“I have told you,” said he. “It will make me immortal.”

But it was not so much from speech and argument that Darcy grew to grasp
his friend’s conception, as from the ordinary conduct of his life. They
were passing, for instance, one morning down the village street, when an
old woman, very bent and decrepit, but with an extraordinary
cheerfulness of face, hobbled out from her cottage. Frank instantly
stopped when he saw her.

“You old darling! How goes it all?” he said.

But she did not answer, her dim old eyes were rivetted on his face; she
seemed to drink in like a thirsty creature the beautiful radiance which
shone there. Suddenly she put her two withered old hands on his
shoulders.

“You’re just the sunshine itself,” she said, and he kissed her and
passed on.

But scarcely a hundred yards further a strange contradiction of such
tenderness occurred. A child running along the path towards them fell on
its face, and set up a dismal cry of fright and pain. A look of horror
came into Frank’s eyes, and, putting his fingers in his ears, he fled at
full speed down the street, and did not pause till he was out of
hearing. Darcy, having ascertained that the child was not really hurt,
followed him in bewilderment.

“Are you without pity then?” he asked.

Frank shook his head impatiently.

“Can’t you see?” he asked. “Can’t you understand that that sort of
thing, pain, anger, anything unlovely throws me back, retards the coming
of the great hour! Perhaps when it comes I shall be able to piece that
side of life on to the other, on to the true religion of joy. At present
I can’t.”

“But the old woman. Was she not ugly?”

Frank’s radiance gradually returned.

“Ah, no. She was like me. She longed for joy, and knew it when she saw
it, the old darling.”

Another question suggested itself.

“Then what about Christianity?” asked Darcy.

“I can’t accept it. I can’t believe in any creed of which the central
doctrine is that God who is Joy should have had to suffer. Perhaps it
was so; in some inscrutable way I believe it may have been so, but I
don’t understand how it was possible. So I leave it alone; my affair is
joy.”

They had come to the weir above the village, and the thunder of riotous
cool water was heavy in the air. Trees dipped into the translucent
stream with slender trailing branches, and the meadow where they stood
was starred with midsummer blossomings. Larks shot up carolling into the
crystal dome of blue, and a thousand voices of June sang round them.
Frank, bare-headed as was his wont, with his coat slung over his arm and
his shirt sleeves rolled up above the elbow, stood there like some
beautiful wild animal with eyes half-shut and mouth half-open, drinking
in the scented warmth of the air. Then suddenly he flung himself face
downwards on the grass at the edge of the stream, burying his face in
the daisies and cowslips, and lay stretched there in wide-armed ecstasy,
with his long fingers pressing and stroking the dewy herbs of the field.
Never before had Darcy seen him thus fully possessed by his idea; his
caressing fingers, his half-buried face pressed close to the grass, even
the clothed lines of his figure were instinct with a vitality that
somehow was different from that of other men. And some faint glow from
it reached Darcy, some thrill, some vibration from that charged
recumbent body passed to him, and for a moment he understood as he had
not understood before, despite his persistent questions and the candid
answers they received, how real, and how realised by Frank, his idea
was.

Then suddenly the muscles in Frank’s neck became stiff and alert, and he
half-raised his head.

“The Pan-pipes, the Pan-pipes,” he whispered. “Close, oh, so close.”

Very slowly, as if a sudden movement might interrupt the melody, he
raised himself and leaned on the elbow of his bent arm. His eyes opened
wider, the lower lids drooped as if he focussed his eyes on something
very far away, and the smile on his face broadened and quivered like
sunlight on still water, till the exultance of its happiness was
scarcely human. So he remained motionless and rapt for some minutes,
then the look of listening died from his face, and he bowed his head
satisfied.

“Ah, that was good,” he said. “How is it possible you did not hear? Oh,
you poor fellow! Did you really hear nothing?”

A week of this outdoor and stimulating life did wonders in restoring to
Darcy the vigour and health which his weeks of fever had filched from
him, and as his normal activity and higher pressure of vitality
returned, he seemed to himself to fall even more under the spell which
the miracle of Frank’s youth cast over him. Twenty times a day he found
himself saying to himself suddenly at the end of some ten minutes’
silent resistance to the absurdity of Frank’s idea: “But it isn’t
possible; it can’t be possible,” and from the fact of his having to
assure himself so frequently of this, he knew that he was struggling and
arguing with a conclusion which already had taken root in his mind. For
in any case a visible living miracle confronted him, since it was
equally impossible that this youth, this boy, trembling on the verge of
manhood, was thirty-five. Yet such was the fact.

July was ushered in by a couple of days of blustering and fretful rain,
and Darcy, unwilling to risk a chill, kept to the house. But to Frank
this weeping change of weather seemed to have no bearing on the
behaviour of man, and he spent his days exactly as he did under the suns
of June, lying in his hammock, stretched on the dripping grass, or
making huge rambling excursions into the forest, the birds hopping from
tree to tree after him, to return in the evening, drenched and soaked,
but with the same unquenchable flame of joy burning within him.

“Catch cold?” he would ask, “I’ve forgotten how to do it, I think. I
suppose it makes one’s body more sensible always to sleep out-of-doors.
People who live indoors always remind me of something peeled and
skinless.”

“Do you mean to say you slept out-of-doors last night in that deluge?”
asked Darcy. “And where, may I ask?”

Frank thought a moment.

“I slept in the hammock till nearly dawn,” he said. “For I remember the
light blinked in the east when I awoke. Then I went--where did I go--oh,
yes, to the meadow where the Pan-pipes sounded so close a week ago. You
were with me, do you remember? But I always have a rug if it is wet.”

And he went whistling upstairs.

Somehow that little touch, his obvious effort to recall where he had
slept, brought strangely home to Darcy the wonderful romance of which he
was the still half-incredulous beholder. Sleep till close on dawn in a
hammock, then the tramp--or probably scamper--underneath the windy and
weeping heavens to the remote and lonely meadow by the weir! The picture
of other such nights rose before him; Frank sleeping perhaps by the
bathing-place under the filtered twilight of the stars, or the white
blaze of moon-shine, a stir and awakening at some dead hour, perhaps a
space of silent wide-eyed thought, and then awandering through the
hushed woods to some other dormitory, alone with his happiness, alone
with the joy and the life that suffused and enveloped him, without other
thought or desire or aim except the hourly and never-ceasing communion
with the joy of nature.

They were in the middle of dinner that night, talking on indifferent
subjects, when Darcy suddenly broke off in the middle of a sentence.

“I’ve got it,” he said. “At last I’ve got it.”

“Congratulate you,” said Frank. “But what?”

“The radical unsoundness of your idea. It is this: ‘All Nature from
highest to lowest is full, crammed full of suffering; every living
organism in nature preys on another, yet in your aim to get close to,
to be one with nature, you leave suffering altogether out; you run away
from it, you refuse to recognise it. And you are waiting, you say, for
the final revelation.”

Frank’s brow clouded slightly.

“Well,” he asked, rather wearily.

“Cannot you guess then when the final revelation will be? In joy you are
supreme, I grant you that; I did not know a man could be so master of
it. You have learned perhaps practically all that nature can teach. And
if, as you think, the final revelation is coming to you, it will be the
revelation of horror, suffering, death, pain in all its hideous forms.
Suffering does exist: you hate it and fear it.”

Frank held up his hand.

“Stop; let me think,” he said.

There was silence for a long minute.

“That never struck me,” he said at length. “It is possible that what you
suggest is true. Does the sight of Pan mean that, do you think? Is it
that nature, take it altogether, suffers horribly, suffers to a hideous
inconceivable extent? Shall I be shown all the suffering?”

He got up and came round to where Darcy sat.

“If it is so, so be it,” he said. “Because, my dear fellow, I am near,
so splendidly near to the final revelation. To-day the pipes have
sounded almost without pause. I have even heard the rustle in the
bushes, I believe, of Pan’s coming. I have seen, yes, I saw to-day, the
bushes pushed aside as if by a hand, and piece of a face, not human,
peered through. But I was not frightened, at least I did not run away
this time.”

He took a turn up to the window and back again.

“Yes, there is suffering all through,” he said, “and I have left it all
out of my search. Perhaps, as you say, the revelation will be that. And
in that case, it will be good-bye. I have gone on one line. I shall have
gone too far along one road, without having explored the other. But I
can’t go back now. I wouldn’t if I could; not a step would I retrace! In
any case, whatever the revelation is, it will be God. I’m sure of that.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The rainy weather soon passed, and with the return of the sun Darcy
again joined Frank in long rambling days. It grew extraordinarily
hotter, and with the fresh bursting of life, after the rain, Frank’s
vitality seemed to blaze higher and higher. Then, as is the habit of the
English weather, one evening clouds began to bank themselves up in the
west, the sun went down in a glare of coppery thunder-rack, and the
whole earth broiling under an unspeakable oppression and sultriness
paused and panted for the storm. After sunset the remote fires of
lightning began to wink and flicker on the horizon, but when bed-time
came the storm seemed to have moved no nearer, though a very low
unceasing noise of thunder was audible. Weary and oppressed by the
stress of the day, Darcy fell at once into a heavy uncomforting sleep.

He woke suddenly into full consciousness, with the din of some appalling
explosion of thunder in his ears, and sat up in bed with racing heart.
Then for a moment, as he recovered himself from the panic-land which
lies between sleeping and waking, there was silence, except for the
steady hissing of rain on the shrubs outside his window. But suddenly
that silence was shattered and shredded into fragments by a scream from
somewhere close at hand outside in the black garden, a scream of supreme
and despairing terror. Again and once again it shrilled up, and then a
babble of awful words was interjected. A quivering sobbing voice that he
knew, said:

“My God, oh, my God; oh, Christ!”

And then followed a little mocking, bleating laugh. Then was silence
again; only the rain hissed on the shrubs.

All this was but the affair of a moment, and without pause either to put
on clothes or light a candle, Darcy was already fumbling at his
door-handle. Even as he opened it he met a terror-stricken face outside,
that of the man-servant who carried a light.

“Did you hear?” he asked.

The man’s face was bleached to a dull shining whiteness.

“Yes, sir,” he said. “It was the master’s voice.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Together they hurried down the stairs, and through the dining-room where
an orderly table for breakfast had already been laid, and out on to the
terrace. The rain for the moment had been utterly stayed, as if the tap
of the heavens had been turned off, and under the lowering black sky,
not quite dark, since the moon rode somewhere serene behind the
conglomerated thunder-clouds, Darcy stumbled into the garden, followed
by the servant with the candle. The monstrous leaping shadow of himself
was cast before him on the lawn; lost and wandering odours of rose and
lily and damp earth were thick about him, but more pungent was some
sharp and acrid smell that suddenly reminded him of a certain chalet in
which he had once taken refuge in the Alps. In the blackness of the hazy
light from the sky, and the vague tossing of the candle behind him, he
saw that the hammock in which Frank so often lay was tenanted. A gleam
of white shirt was there, as if a man sitting up in it, but across that
there was an obscure dark shadow, and as he approached the acrid odour
grew more intense.

He was now only some few yards away, when suddenly the black shadow
seemed to jump into the air, then came down with tappings of hard hoofs
on the brick path that ran down the pergola, and with frolicsome
skippings galloped off into the bushes. When that was gone Darcy could
see quite clearly that a shirted figure sat up in the hammock. For one
moment, from sheer terror of the unseen, he hung on his step, and the
servant joining him they walked together to the hammock.

It was Frank. He was in shirt and trousers only, and he sat up with
braced arms. For one half-second he stared at them, his face a mask of
horrible contorted terror. His upper lip was drawn back so that the gums
of the teeth appeared, and his eyes were focussed not on the two who
approached him but on something quite close to him; his nostrils were
widely expanded, as if he panted for breath, and terror incarnate and
repulsion and deathly anguish ruled dreadful lines on his smooth cheeks
and forehead. Then even as they looked the body sank backwards, and the
ropes of the hammock wheezed and strained.

Darcy lifted him out and carried him indoors. Once he thought there was
a faint convulsive stir of the limbs that lay with so dead a weight in
his arms, but when they got inside, there was no trace of life. But the
look of supreme terror and agony of fear had gone from his face, a boy
tired with play but still smiling in his sleep was the burden he laid on
the floor. His eyes had closed, and the beautiful mouth lay in smiling
curves, even as when a few mornings ago, in the meadow by the weir, it
had quivered to the music of the unheard melody of Pan’s pipes. Then
they looked further.

Frank had come back from his bathe before dinner that night in his usual
costume of shirt and trousers only. He had not dressed, and during
dinner, so Darcy remembered, he had rolled up the sleeves of his shirt
to above the elbow. Later, as they sat and talked after dinner on the
close sultriness of the evening, he had unbuttoned the front of his
shirt to let what little breath of wind there was play on his skin. The
sleeves were rolled up now, the front of the shirt was unbuttoned, and
on his arms and on the brown skin of his chest were strange
discolorations which grew momently more clear and defined, till they saw
that the marks were pointed prints, as if caused by the hoofs of some
monstrous goat that had leaped and stamped upon him.




BETWEEN THE LIGHTS


The day had been one unceasing fall of snow from sunrise until the
gradual withdrawal of the vague white light outside indicated that the
sun had set again. But as usual at this hospitable and delightful house
of Everard Chandler where I often spent Christmas, and was spending it
now, there had been no lack of entertainment, and the hours had passed
with a rapidity that had surprised us. A short billiard tournament had
filled up the time between breakfast and lunch, with Badminton and the
morning papers for those who were temporarily not engaged, while
afterwards, the interval till teatime had been occupied by the majority
of the party in a huge game of hide-and-seek all over the house, barring
the billiard-room, which was sanctuary for any who desired peace. But
few had done that; the enchantment of Christmas, I must suppose, had,
like some spell, made children of us again, and it was with palsied
terror and trembling misgivings that we had tip-toed up and down the dim
passages, from any corner of which some wild screaming form might dart
out on us. Then, wearied with exercise and emotion, we had assembled
again for tea in the hall, a room of shadows and panels on which the
light from the wide open fireplace, where there burned a divine mixture
of peat and logs, flickered and grew bright again on the walls. Then, as
was proper, ghost-stories, for the narration of which the electric light
was put out, so that the listeners might conjecture anything they
pleased to be lurking in the corners, succeeded, and we vied with each
other in blood, bones, skeletons, armour and shrieks. I had just given
my contribution, and was reflecting with some complacency that probably
the worst was now known, when Everard, who had not yet administered to
the horror of his guests, spoke. He was sitting opposite me in the full
blaze of the fire, looking, after the illness he had gone through during
the autumn, still rather pale and delicate. All the same he had been
among the boldest and best in the exploration of dark places that
afternoon, and the look on his face now rather startled me.

“No, I don’t mind that sort of thing,” he said. “The paraphernalia of
ghosts has become somehow rather hackneyed, and when I hear of screams
and skeletons I feel I am on familiar ground, and can at least hide my
head under the bed-clothes.”

“Ah, but the bed-clothes were twitched away by my skeleton,” said I, in
self-defence.

“I know, but I don’t even mind that. Why, there are seven, eight
skeletons in this room now, covered with blood and skin and other
horrors. No, the nightmares of one’s childhood were the really
frightening things, because they were vague. There was the true
atmosphere of horror about them because one didn’t know what one feared.
Now if one could recapture that----”

Mrs Chandler got quickly out of her seat.

“Oh, Everard,” she said, “surely you don’t wish to recapture it again. I
should have thought once was enough.”

This was enchanting. A chorus of invitation asked him to proceed: the
real true ghost-story first-hand, which was what seemed to be indicated,
was too precious a thing to lose.

Everard laughed. “No, dear, I don’t want to recapture it again at all,”
he said to his wife. Then to us: “But really the--well, the nightmare
perhaps, to which I was referring, is of the vaguest and most
unsatisfactory kind. It has no apparatus about it at all. You will
probably all say that it was nothing, and wonder why I was frightened.
But I was; it frightened me out of my wits. And I only just saw
something, without being able to swear what it was, and heard something
which might have been a falling stone.”

“Anyhow tell us about the falling stone,” said I.

There was a stir of movement about the circle round the fire, and the
movement was not of purely physical order. It was as if--this is only
what I personally felt--it was as if the childish gaiety of the hours
we had passed that day was suddenly withdrawn; we had jested on certain
subjects, we had played hide-and-seek with all the power of earnestness
that was in us. But now--so it seemed to me--there was going to be real
hide-and-seek, real terrors were going to lurk in dark corners, or if
not real terrors, terrors so convincing as to assume the garb of
reality, were going to pounce on us. And Mrs Chandler’s exclamation as
she sat down again, “Oh, Everard, won’t it excite you?” tended in any
case to excite us. The room still remained in dubious darkness except
for the sudden lights disclosed on the walls by the leaping flames on
the hearth, and there was wide field for conjecture as to what might
lurk in the dim corners. Everard, moreover, who had been sitting in
bright light before, was banished by the extinction of some flaming log
into the shadows. A voice alone spoke to us, as he sat back in his low
chair, a voice rather slow but very distinct.

“Last year,” he said, “on the twenty-fourth of December, we were down
here, as usual, Amy and I, for Christmas. Several of you who are here
now were here then. Three or four of you at least.”

I was one of these, but like the others kept silence, for the
identification, so it seemed to me, was not asked for. And he went on
again without a pause.

“Those of you who were here then,” he said, “and are here now, will
remember how very warm it was this day year. You will remember, too,
that we played croquet that day on the lawn. It was perhaps a little
cold for croquet, and we played it rather in order to be able to
say--with sound evidence to back the statement--that we had done so.”

Then he turned and addressed the whole little circle.

“We played ties of half-games,” he said, “just as we have played
billiards to-day, and it was certainly as warm on the lawn then as it
was in the billiard-room this morning directly after breakfast, while
to-day I should not wonder if there was three feet of snow outside.
More, probably; listen.”

A sudden draught fluted in the chimney, and the fire flared up as the
current of air caught it. The wind also drove the snow against the
windows, and as he said “Listen,” we heard a soft scurry of the falling
flakes against the panes, like the soft tread of many little people who
stepped lightly, but with the persistence of multitudes who were
flocking to some rendezvous. Hundreds of little feet seemed to be
gathering outside; only the glass kept them out. And of the eight
skeletons present four or five anyhow turned and looked at the windows.
These were small-paned, with leaden bars. On the leaden bars little
heaps of snow had accumulated, but there was nothing else to be seen.

“Yes, last Christmas Eve was very warm and sunny,” went on Everard. “We
had had no frost that autumn, and a temerarious dahlia was still in
flower. I have always thought that it must have been mad.”

He paused a moment.

“And I wonder if I were not mad too,” he added.

No one interrupted him; there was something arresting, I must suppose,
in what he was saying; it chimed in anyhow with the hide-and-seek, with
the suggestions of the lonely snow. Mrs Chandler had sat down again, but
I heard her stir in her chair. But never was there a gay party so
reduced as we had been in the last five minutes. Instead of laughing at
ourselves for playing silly games, we were all taking a serious game
seriously.

“Anyhow I was sitting out,” he said to me, “while you and my wife played
your half-game of croquet. Then it struck me that it was not so warm as
I had supposed, because quite suddenly I shivered. And shivering I
looked up. But I did not see you and her playing croquet at all. I saw
something which had no relation to you and her--at least I hope not.”

Now the angler lands his fish, the stalker kills his stag, and the
speaker holds his audience. And as the fish is gaffed, and as the stag
is shot, so were we held. There was no getting away till he had finished
with us.

“You all know the croquet lawn,” he said, “and how it is bounded all
round by a flower border with a brick wall behind it, through which,
you will remember, there is only one gate. Well, I looked up and saw
that the lawn--I could for one moment see it was still a lawn--was
shrinking, and the walls closing in upon it. As they closed in too, they
grew higher, and simultaneously the light began to fade and be sucked
from the sky, till it grew quite dark overhead and only a glimmer of
light came in through the gate.

“There was, as I told you, a dahlia in flower that day, and as this
dreadful darkness and bewilderment came over me, I remember that my eyes
sought it in a kind of despair, holding on, as it were, to any familiar
object. But it was no longer a dahlia, and for the red of its petals I
saw only the red of some feeble firelight. And at that moment the
hallucination was complete. I was no longer sitting on the lawn watching
croquet, but I was in a low-roofed room, something like a cattle-shed,
but round. Close above my head, though I was sitting down, ran rafters
from wall to wall. It was nearly dark, but a little light came in from
the door opposite to me, which seemed to lead into a passage that
communicated with the exterior of the place. Little, however, of the
wholesome air came into this dreadful den; the atmosphere was oppressive
and foul beyond all telling, it was as if for years it had been the
place of some human menagerie, and for those years had been uncleaned
and unsweetened by the winds of heaven. Yet that oppressiveness was
nothing to the awful horror of the place from the view of the spirit.
Some dreadful atmosphere of crime and abomination dwelt heavy in it, its
denizens, whoever they were, were scarce human, so it seemed to me, and
though men and women, were akin more to the beasts of the field. And in
addition there was present to me some sense of the weight of years; I
had been taken and thrust down into some epoch of dim antiquity.”

He paused a moment, and the fire on the hearth leaped up for a second
and then died down again. But in that gleam I saw that all faces were
turned to Everard, and that all wore some look of dreadful expectancy.
Certainly I felt it myself, and waited in a sort of shrinking horror for
what was coming.

“As I told you,” he continued, “where there had been that unseasonable
dahlia, there now burned a dim firelight, and my eyes were drawn there.
Shapes were gathered round it; what they were I could not at first see.
Then perhaps my eyes got more accustomed to the dusk, or the fire burned
better, for I perceived that they were of human form, but very small,
for when one rose, with a horrible chattering, to his feet, his head was
still some inches off the low roof. He was dressed in a sort of shirt
that came to his knees, but his arms were bare and covered with hair.
Then the gesticulation and chattering increased, and I knew that they
were talking about me, for they kept pointing in my direction. At that
my horror suddenly deepened, for I became aware that I was powerless and
could not move hand or foot; a helpless, nightmare impotence had
possession of me. I could not lift a finger or turn my head. And in the
paralysis of that fear I tried to scream, but not a sound could I utter.

“All this I suppose took place with the instantaneousness of a dream,
for at once, and without transition, the whole thing had vanished, and I
was back on the lawn again, while the stroke for which my wife was
aiming was still unplayed. But my face was dripping with perspiration,
and I was trembling all over.

“Now you may all say that I had fallen asleep, and had a sudden
nightmare. That may be so; but I was conscious of no sense of sleepiness
before, and I was conscious of none afterwards. It was as if someone had
held a book before me, whisked the pages open for a second and closed
them again.”

Somebody, I don’t know who, got up from his chair with a sudden movement
that made me start, and turned on the electric light. I do not mind
confessing that I was rather glad of this.

Everard laughed.

“Really I feel like Hamlet in the play-scene,” he said, “and as if there
was a guilty uncle present. Shall I go on?”

I don’t think anyone replied, and he went on:

“Well, let us say for the moment that it was not a dream exactly, but a
hallucination. Whichever it was, in any case it haunted me; for months,
I think, it was never quite out of my mind, but lingered somewhere in
the dusk of consciousness, sometimes sleeping quietly, so to speak, but
sometimes stirring in its sleep. It was no good my telling myself that I
was disquieting myself in vain, for it was as if something had actually
entered into my very soul, as if some seed of horror had been planted
there. And as the weeks went on the seed began to sprout, so that I
could no longer even tell myself that that vision had been a moment’s
disorderment only. I can’t say that it actually affected my health. I
did not, as far as I know, sleep or eat insufficiently, but morning
after morning I used to wake, not gradually and through pleasant dozings
into full consciousness, but with absolute suddenness, and find myself
plunged in an abyss of despair. Often too, eating or drinking, I used to
pause and wonder if it was worth while.

“Eventually I told two people about my trouble, hoping that perhaps the
mere communication would help matters, hoping also, but very distantly,
that though I could not believe at present that digestion or the
obscurities of the nervous system were at fault, a doctor by some simple
dose might convince me of it. In other words I told my wife, who laughed
at me, and my doctor who laughed also, and assured me that my health
was quite unnecessarily robust. At the same time he suggested that
change of air and scene does wonders for the delusions that exist merely
in the imagination. He also told me, in answer to a direct question,
that he would stake his reputation on the certainty that I was not going
mad.

“Well, we went up to London as usual for the season, and though nothing
whatever occurred to remind me in any way of that single moment on
Christmas Eve, the reminding was seen to all right, the moment itself
took care of that, for instead of fading as is the way of sleeping or
waking dreams, it grew every day more vivid, and ate, so to speak, like
some corrosive acid into my mind, etching itself there. And to London
succeeded Scotland.

“I took last year for the first time a small forest up in Sutherland,
called Glen Callan, very remote and wild, but affording excellent
stalking. It was not far from the sea, and the gillies used always to
warn me to carry a compass on the hill, because sea-mists were liable to
come up with frightful rapidity, and there was always a danger of being
caught by one, and of having perhaps to wait hours till it cleared
again. This at first I always used to do, but, as every one knows, any
precaution that one takes which continues to be unjustified gets
gradually relaxed, and at the end of a few weeks, since the weather had
been uniformly clear, it was natural that, as often as not, my compass
remained at home.

“One day the stalk took me on to a part of my ground that I had seldom
been on before, a very high table-land on the limit of my forest, which
went down very steeply on one side to a loch that lay below it, and on
the other, by gentler gradations, to the river that came from the loch,
six miles below which stood the lodge. The wind had necessitated our
climbing up--or so my stalker had insisted--not by the easier way, but
up the crags from the loch. I had argued the point with him, for it
seemed to me that it was impossible that the deer could get our scent if
we went by the more natural path, but he still held to his opinion, and
therefore, since after all this was his part of the job, I yielded. A
dreadful climb we had of it, over big boulders with deep holes in
between, masked by clumps of heather, so that a wary eye and a prodding
stick were necessary for each step if one wished to avoid broken bones.
Adders also literally swarmed in the heather; we must have seen a dozen
at least on our way up, and adders are a beast for which I have no
manner of use. But a couple of hours saw us to the top, only to find
that the stalker had been utterly at fault, and that the deer must quite
infallibly have got wind of us, if they had remained in the place where
we last saw them. That, when we could spy the ground again, we saw had
happened; in any case they had gone. The man insisted the wind had
changed, a palpably stupid excuse, and I wondered at that moment what
other reason he had--for reason I felt sure there must be--for not
wishing to take what would clearly now have been a better route. But
this piece of bad management did not spoil our luck, for within an hour
we had spied more deer, and about two o’clock I got a shot, killing a
heavy stag. Then sitting on the heather I ate lunch, and enjoyed a
well-earned bask and smoke in the sun. The pony meantime had been
saddled with the stag, and was plodding homewards.

“The morning had been extraordinarily warm, with a little wind blowing
off the sea, which lay a few miles off sparkling beneath a blue haze,
and all morning in spite of our abominable climb I had had an extreme
sense of peace, so much so that several times I had probed my mind, so
to speak, to find if the horror still lingered there. But I could
scarcely get any response from it. Never since Christmas had I been so
free of fear, and it was with a great sense of repose, both physical and
spiritual, that I lay looking up into the blue sky, watching my
smoke-whorls curl slowly away into nothingness. But I was not allowed to
take my ease long, for Sandy came and begged that I would move. The
weather had changed, he said, the wind had shifted again, and he wanted
me to be off this high ground and on the path again as soon as possible,
because it looked to him as if a sea-mist would presently come up.

“‘And yon’s a bad place to get down in the mist,’ he added, nodding
towards the crags we had come up.

“I looked at the man in amazement, for to our right lay a gentle slope
down on to the river, and there was now no possible reason for again
tackling those hideous rocks up which we had climbed this morning. More
than ever I was sure he had some secret reason for not wishing to go the
obvious way. But about one thing he was certainly right, the mist was
coming up from the sea, and I felt in my pocket for the compass, and
found I had forgotten to bring it.

“Then there followed a curious scene which lost us time that we could
really ill afford to waste, I insisting on going down by the way that
common-sense directed, he imploring me to take his word for it that the
crags were the better way. Eventually, I marched off to the easier
descent, and told him not to argue any more but follow. What annoyed me
about him was that he would only give the most senseless reasons for
preferring the crags. There were mossy places, he said, on the way I
wished to go, a thing patently false, since the summer had been one
spell of unbroken weather; or it was longer, also obviously untrue; or
there were so many vipers about. But seeing that none of these arguments
produced any effect, at last he desisted, and came after me in silence.

“We were not yet half down when the mist was upon us, shooting up from
the valley like the broken water of a wave, and in three minutes we were
enveloped in a cloud of fog so thick that we could barely see a dozen
yards in front of us. It was therefore another cause for
self-congratulation that we were not now, as we should otherwise have
been, precariously clambering on the face of those crags up which we had
come with such difficulty in the morning, and as I rather prided myself
on my powers of generalship in the matter of direction, I continued
leading, feeling sure that before long we should strike the track by the
river. More than all, the absolute freedom from fear elated me; since
Christmas I had not known the instinctive joy of that; I felt like a
school-boy home for the holidays. But the mist grew thicker and thicker,
and whether it was that real rain-clouds had formed above it, or that it
was of an extraordinary density itself, I got wetter in the next hour
than I have ever been before or since. The wet seemed to penetrate the
skin, and chill the very bones. And still there was no sign of the track
for which I was making. Behind me, muttering to himself, followed the
stalker, but his arguments and protestations were dumb, and it seemed as
if he kept close to me, as if afraid.

“Now there are many unpleasant companions in this world; I would not for
instance care to be on the hill with a drunkard or a maniac, but worse
than either, I think, is a frightened man, because his trouble is
infectious, and, insensibly, I began to be afraid of being frightened
too. From that it is but a short step to fear. Other perplexities too
beset us. At one time we seemed to be walking on flat ground, at another
I felt sure we were climbing again, whereas all the time we ought to
have been descending, unless we had missed the way very badly indeed.
Also, for the month was October, it was beginning to get dark, and it
was with a sense of relief that I remembered that the full moon would
rise soon after sunset. But it had grown very much colder, and soon,
instead of rain, we found we were walking through a steady fall of snow.

“Things were pretty bad, but then for the moment they seemed to mend,
for, far away to the left, I suddenly heard the brawling of the river.
It should, it is true, have been straight in front of me and we were
perhaps a mile out of our way, but this was better than the blind
wandering of the last hour, and turning to the left, I walked towards
it. But before I had gone a hundred yards, I heard a sudden choked cry
behind me, and just saw Sandy’s form flying as if in terror of pursuit,
into the mists. I called to him but got no reply, and heard only the
spurned stones of his running. What had frightened him I had no idea,
but certainly with his disappearance, the infection of his fear
disappeared also, and I went on, I may almost say, with gaiety. On the
moment, however, I saw a sudden well-defined blackness in front of me,
and before I knew what I was doing I was half stumbling, half walking up
a very steep grass slope.

“During the last few minutes the wind had got up, and the driving snow
was peculiarly uncomfortable, but there had been a certain consolation
in thinking that the wind would soon disperse these mists, and I had
nothing more than a moonlight walk home. But as I paused on this slope,
I became aware of two things, one, that the blackness in front of me was
very close, the other that, whatever it was, it sheltered me from the
snow. So I climbed on a dozen yards into its friendly shelter, for it
seemed to me to be friendly.

“A wall some twelve feet high crowned the slope, and exactly where I
struck it there was a hole in it, or door rather, through which a little
light appeared. Wondering at this I pushed on, bending down, for the
passage was very low, and in a dozen yards came out on the other side.
Just as I did this the sky suddenly grew lighter, the wind, I suppose,
having dispersed the mists, and the moon, though not yet visible through
the flying skirts of cloud, made sufficient illumination.

“I was in a circular enclosure, and above me there projected from the
walls some four feet from the ground, broken stones which must have been
intended to support a floor. Then simultaneously two things occurred.

“The whole of my nine months’ terror came back to me, for I saw that the
vision in the garden was fulfilled, and at the same moment I saw
stealing towards me a little figure as of a man, but only about three
foot six in height. That my eyes told me; my ears told me that he
stumbled on a stone; my nostrils told me that the air I breathed was of
an overpowering foulness, and my soul told me that it was sick unto
death. I think I tried to scream, but could not, I know I tried to move
and could not. And it crept closer.

“Then I suppose the terror which held me spellbound so spurred me that I
must move, for next moment I heard a cry break from my lips, and was
stumbling through the passage. I made one leap of it down the grass
slope, and ran as I hope never to have to run again. What direction I
took I did not pause to consider, so long as I put distance between me
and that place. Luck, however, favoured me, and before long I struck the
track by the river, and an hour afterwards reached the lodge.

“Next day I developed a chill, and as you know pneumonia laid me on my
back for six weeks.

“Well, that is my story, and there are many explanations. You may say
that I fell asleep on the lawn, and was reminded of that by finding
myself, under discouraging circumstances, in an old Picts’ castle, where
a sheep or a goat that, like myself, had taken shelter from the storm,
was moving about. Yes, there are hundreds of ways in which you may
explain it. But the coincidence was an odd one, and those who believe in
second sight might find an instance of their hobby in it.”

“And that is all?” I asked.

“Yes, it was nearly too much for me. I think the dressing-bell has
sounded.”




OUTSIDE THE DOOR


The rest of the small party staying with my friend Geoffrey Aldwych in
the charming old house which he had lately bought at a little village
north of Sheringham on the Norfolk coast had drifted away soon after
dinner to bridge and billiards, and Mrs Aldwych and myself had for the
time been left alone in the drawing-room, seated one on each side of a
small round table which we had very patiently and unsuccessfully been
trying to turn. But such pressure, psychical or physical, as we had put
upon it, though of the friendliest and most encouraging nature had not
overcome in the smallest degree the very slight inertia which so small
an object might have been supposed to possess, and it had remained as
fixed as the most constant of the stars. No tremor even had passed
through its slight and spindle-like legs. In consequence we had, after a
really considerable period of patient endeavour, left it to its wooden
repose, and proceeded to theorise about psychical matters instead, with
no stupid table to contradict in practice all our ideas on the subject.

This I had added with a certain bitterness born of failure, for if we
could not move so insignificant an object, we might as well give up all
idea of moving anything. But hardly were the words out of my mouth when
there came from the abandoned table, a single peremptory rap, loud and
rather startling.

“What’s that?” I asked.

“Only a rap,” said she. “I thought something would happen before long.”

“And do you really think that is a spirit rapping?” I asked.

“Oh dear no. I don’t think it has anything whatever to do with spirits.”

“More perhaps with the very dry weather we have been having. Furniture
often cracks like that in the summer.”

Now this, in point of fact, was not quite the case. Neither in summer
nor in winter have I heard ever furniture crack as the table had
cracked, for the sound, whatever it was, did not at all resemble the
husky creak of contracting wood. It was a loud sharp crack like the
smart concussion of one hard object with another.

“No, I don’t think it had much to do with dry weather either,” said she
smiling. “I think, if you wish to know, that it was the direct result of
our attempt to turn the table. Does that sound nonsense?”

“At present, yes,” said I, “though I have no doubt that if you tried you
could make it sound sense. There is, I notice, a certain plausibility
about you and your theories----”

“Now you are being merely personal,” she observed.

“For the good motive, to goad you into explanations and enlargements.
Please go on.”

“Let us stroll outside, then,” said she, “and sit in the garden, if you
are sure you prefer my plausibilities to bridge. It is deliciously warm,
and----”

“And the darkness will be more suitable for the propagation of psychical
phenomena. As at séances,” said I.

“Oh, there is nothing psychical about my plausibilities,” said she. “The
phenomena I mean are purely physical, according to my theory.”

So we wandered out into the transparent half light of multitudinous
stars. The last crimson feather of sunset, which had hovered long in the
West, had been blown away with the breath of the night wind, and the
moon, which would presently rise, had not yet cut the dim horizon of the
sea, which lay very quiet, breathing gently in its sleep with stir of
whispering ripples. Across the dark velvet of the close-cropped lawn,
which stretched seawards from the house, blew a little breeze full of
the savour of salt and the freshness of night, with, every now and then,
a hint so subtly conveyed as to be scarcely perceptible of its travel
across the sleeping fragrance of drowsy garden-beds, over which the
white moths hovered seeking their night-honey. The house itself, with
its two battlemented towers of Elizabethan times, gleamed with many
windows, and we passed out of sight of it, and into the shadow of a
box-hedge, clipped into shapes and monstrous fantasies, and found chairs
by the striped tent at the top of the sheltered bowling-alley.

“And this is all very plausible,” said I. “Theories, if you please, at
length, and, if possible, a full length illustration also.”

“By which you mean a ghost-story, or something to that effect?”

“Precisely: and, without presuming to dictate, if possible, first-hand.”

“Oddly enough, I can supply that also,” said she. “So first I will tell
you my general theory, and follow it by a story that seems to bear it
out. It happened to me, and it happened here.”

“I am sure it will fill the bill,” said I.

She paused a moment while I lit a cigarette, and then began in her very
clear, pleasant voice. She has the most lucid voice I know, and to me
sitting there in the deep-dyed dusk, the words seemed the very
incarnation of clarity, for they dropped into the still quiet of the
darkness, undisturbed by impressions conveyed to other senses.

       *       *       *       *       *

“We are only just beginning to conjecture,” she said, “how inextricable
is the interweaving between mind, soul, life, call it what you
will--and the purely material part of the created world. That such
interweaving existed has, of course, been known for centuries; doctors,
for instance, knew that a cheerful optimistic spirit on the part of
their patients conduced towards recovery; that fear, the mere emotion,
had a definite effect on the beat of the heart, that anger produced
chemical changes in the blood, that anxiety led to indigestion, that
under the influence of strong passion a man can do things which in his
normal state he is physically incapable of performing. Here we have
mind, in a simple and familiar manner, producing changes and effects in
tissue, in that which is purely material. By an extension of
this--though, indeed, it is scarcely an extension--we may expect to find
that mind can have an effect, not only on what we call living tissue,
but on dead things, on pieces of wood or stone. At least it is hard to
see why that should not be so.”

“Table-turning, for instance?” I asked.

“That is one instance of how some force, out of that innumerable cohort
of obscure mysterious forces with which we human beings are garrisoned,
can pass, as it is constantly doing, into material things. The laws of
its passing we do not know; sometimes we wish it to pass and it does
not. Just now, for instance, when you and I tried to turn the table,
there was some impediment in the path, though I put down that rap which
followed as an effect of our efforts. But nothing seems more natural to
my mind than that these forces should be transmissible to inanimate
things. Of the manner of its passing we know next to nothing, any more
than we know the manner of the actual process by which fear accelerates
the beating of the heart, but as surely as a Marconi message leaps along
the air by no visible or tangible bridge, so through some subtle gateway
of the body these forces can march from the citadel of the spirit into
material forms, whether that material is a living part of ourselves or
that which we choose to call inanimate nature.”

She paused a moment.

“Under certain circumstances,” she went on, “it seems that the force
which has passed from us into inanimate things can manifest its presence
there. The force that passes into a table can show itself in movements
or in noises coming from the table. The table has been charged with
physical energy. Often and often I have seen a table or a chair move
apparently of its own accord, but only when some outpouring of force,
animal magnetism--call it what you will--has been received by it. A
parallel phenomenon to my mind is exhibited in what we know as haunted
houses, houses in which, as a rule, some crime or act of extreme emotion
or passion has been committed, and in which some echo or re-enactment of
the deed is periodically made visible or audible. A murder has been
committed, let us say, and the room where it took place is haunted. The
figure of the murdered, or less commonly of the murderer, is seen there
by sensitives, and cries are heard, or steps run to and fro. The
atmosphere has somehow been charged with the scene, and the scene in
whole or part repeats itself, though under what laws we do not know,
just as a phonograph will repeat, when properly handled, what has been
said into it.”

“This is all theory,” I remarked.

“But it appears to me to cover a curious set of facts, which is all we
ask of a theory. Otherwise, we must frankly state our disbelief in
haunted houses altogether, or suppose that the spirit of the murdered,
poor wretch, is bound under certain circumstances to re-enact the horror
of its body’s tragedy. It was not enough that its body was killed there,
its soul has to be dragged back and live through it all again with such
vividness that its anguish becomes visible or audible to the eyes or
ears of the sensitive. That to me is unthinkable, whereas my theory is
not. Do I make it at all clear?”

“It is clear enough,” said I, “but I want support for it, the full-sized
illustration.”

“I promised you that, a ghost-story of my own experience.”

Mrs Aldwych paused again, and then began the story which was to
illustrate her theory.

“It is just a year,” she said, “since Jack bought this house from old
Mrs Denison. We had both heard, both he and I, that it was supposed to
be haunted, but neither of us knew any particulars of the haunt
whatever. A month ago I heard what I believe to have been the ghost,
and, when Mrs Denison was staying with us last week, I asked her exactly
what it was, and found it tallied completely with my experience. I will
tell you my experience first, and give her account of the haunt
afterwards.

“A month ago Jack was away for a few days and I remained here alone. One
Sunday evening, I, in my usual health and spirits, as far as I am aware,
both of which are serenely excellent, went up to bed about eleven. My
room is on the first floor, just at the foot of the staircase that leads
to the floor above. There are four more rooms on my passage, all of
which that night were empty, and at the far end of it a door leads into
the landing at the top of the front staircase. On the other side of
that, as you know, are more bedrooms, all of which that night were also
unoccupied; I, in fact, was the only sleeper on the first floor.

“The head of my bed is close behind my door, and there is an electric
light over it. This is controlled by a switch at the bed-head, and
another switch there turns on a light in the passage just outside my
room. That was Jack’s plan: if by chance you want to leave your room
when the house is dark, you can light up the passage before you go out,
and not grope blindly for a switch outside.

“Usually I sleep solidly: it is very rarely indeed that I wake, when
once I have gone to sleep, before I am called. But that night I woke,
which was rare; what was rarer was that I woke in a state of shuddering
and unaccountable terror; I tried to localise my panic, to run it to
earth and reason it away, but without any success. Terror of something I
could not guess at stared me in the face, white, shaking terror. So, as
there was no use in lying quaking in the dark, I lit my lamp, and, with
the view of composing this strange disorder of my fear, began to read
again in the book I had brought up with me. The volume happened to be
‘The Green Carnation,’ a work one would have thought to be full of tonic
to twittering nerves. But it failed of success, even as my reasoning had
done, and after reading a few pages, and finding that the heart-hammer
in my throat grew no quieter, and that the grip of terror was in no way
relaxed, I put out my light and lay down again. I looked at my watch,
however, before doing this, and remember that the time was ten minutes
to two.

“Still matters did not mend: terror, that was slowly becoming a little
more definite, terror of some dark and violent deed that was momently
drawing nearer to me held me in its vice. Something was coming, the
advent of which was perceived by the sub-conscious sense, and was
already conveyed to my conscious mind. And then the clock struck two
jingling chimes, and the stable-clock outside clanged the hour more
sonorously.

“I still lay there, abject and palpitating. Then I heard a sound just
outside my room on the stairs that lead, as I have said, to the second
story, a sound which was perfectly commonplace and unmistakable. Feet
feeling their way in the dark were coming downstairs to my passage: I
could hear also the groping hand slip and slide along the bannisters.
The footfalls came along the few yards of passage between the bottom of
the stairs and my door, and then against my door itself came the brush
of drapery, and on the panels the blind groping of fingers. The handle
rattled as they passed over it, and my terror nearly rose to screaming
point.

“Then a sensible hope struck me. The midnight wanderer might be one of
the servants, ill or in want of something, and yet--why the shuffling
feet and the groping hand? But on the instant of the dawning of that
hope (for I knew that it was of the step and that which was moving in
the dark passage of which I was afraid) I turned on both the light at my
bed-head, and the light of the passage outside, and, opening the door,
looked out. The passage was quite bright from end to end, but it was
perfectly empty. Yet as I looked, seeing nothing of the walker, I still
heard. Down the bright boards I heard the shuffle growing fainter as it
receded, until, judging by the ear, it turned into the gallery at the
end and died away. And with it there died also all my sense of terror.
It was It of which I had been afraid: now It and my terror had passed.
And I went back to bed and slept till morning.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Again Mrs Aldwych paused, and I was silent. Somehow it was in the
extreme simplicity of her experience that the horror lay. She went on
almost immediately.

“Now for the sequel,” she said, “or what I choose to call the
explanation. Mrs Denison, as I told you, came down to stay with us not
long ago, and I mentioned that we had heard, though only vaguely, that
the house was supposed to be haunted, and asked for an account of it.
This is what she told me:

“‘In the year 1610 the heiress to the property was a girl Helen Denison,
who was engaged to be married to young Lord Southern. In case therefore
of her having children, the property would pass away from Denisons. In
case of her death, childless, it would pass to her first cousin. A week
before the marriage took place, he and a brother of his entered the
house, riding here from thirty miles away, after dark, and made their
way to her room on the second storey. There they gagged her and
attempted to kill her, but she escaped from them, groped her way along
this passage, and into the room at the end of the gallery. They followed
her there, and killed her. The facts were known by the younger brother
turning king’s evidence.’

“Now Mrs Denison told me that the ghost had never been seen, but that it
was occasionally heard coming downstairs or going along the passage. She
told me that it was never heard except between the hours of two and
three in the morning, the hour during which the murder took place.”

“And since then have you heard it again?” I asked.

“Yes, more than once. But it has never frightened me again. I feared, as
we all do, what was unknown.”

“I feel that I should fear the known, if I knew it was that,” said I.

“I don’t think you would for long. Whatever theory you adopt about it,
the sounds of the steps and the groping hand, I cannot see that there is
anything to shock or frighten one. My own theory you know----”

“Please apply it to what you heard,” I asked.

“Simply enough. The poor girl felt her way along this passage in the
despair of her agonised terror, hearing no doubt the soft footsteps of
her murderers gaining on her, as she groped along her lost way. The
waves of that terrible brain-storm raging within her, impressed
themselves in some subtle yet physical manner on the place. It would
only be by those people whom we call sensitives that the wrinkles, so
to speak, made by those breaking waves on the sands would be perceived,
and by them not always. But they are there, even as when a Marconi
apparatus is working the waves are there, though they can only be
perceived by a receiver that is in tune. If you believe in brain-waves
at all, the explanation is not so difficult.”

“Then the brain-wave is permanent?”

“Every wave of whatever kind leaves its mark, does it not? If you
disbelieve the whole thing, shall I give you a room on the route of that
poor murdered harmless walker?”

I got up.

“I am very comfortable, thanks, where I am,” I said.




THE TERROR BY NIGHT


The transference of emotion is a phenomenon so common, so constantly
witnessed, that mankind in general have long ceased to be conscious of
its existence, as a thing worth our wonder or consideration, regarding
it as being as natural and commonplace as the transference of things
that act by the ascertained laws of matter. Nobody, for instance, is
surprised, if, when the room is too hot, the opening of a window causes
the cold fresh air of outside to be transferred into the room, and in
the same way no one is surprised when into the same room, perhaps, which
we will imagine as being peopled with dull and gloomy persons, there
enters some one of fresh and sunny mind, who instantly brings into the
stuffy mental atmosphere a change analogous to that of the opened
windows. Exactly how this infection is conveyed we do not know;
considering the wireless wonders (that act by material laws) which are
already beginning to lose their wonder now that we have our newspaper
brought as a matter of course every morning in mid-Atlantic, it would
not perhaps be rash to conjecture that in some subtle and occult way the
transference of emotion is in reality material too. Certainly (to take
another instance) the sight of definitely material things, like writing
on a page, conveys emotion apparently direct to our minds, as when our
pleasure or pity is stirred by a book, and it is therefore possible that
mind may act on mind by means as material as that.

Occasionally, however, we come across phenomena, which, though they may
easily be as material as any of these things, are rarer, and therefore
more astounding. Some people call them ghosts, some conjuring tricks,
and some nonsense. It seems simpler to group them under the head of
transferred emotions, and they may appeal to any of the senses. Some
ghosts are seen, some heard, some felt, and though I know of no instance
of a ghost being tasted, yet it will seem in the following pages that
these occult phenomenon may appeal at any rate to the senses that
perceive heat, cold, or smell. For, to take the analogy of wireless
telegraphy, we are all of us probably ‘receivers’ to some extent, and
catch now and then a message or part of a message that the eternal waves
of emotion are ceaselessly shouting aloud to those who have ears to
hear, and materializing themselves for those who have eyes to see. Not
being, as a rule, perfectly tuned, we grasp but pieces and fragments of
such messages, a few coherent words it may be, or a few words which seem
to have no sense. The following story, however, to my mind, is
interesting, because it shows how different pieces of what no doubt was
one message were received and recorded by several different people
simultaneously. Ten years have elapsed since the events recorded took
place, but they were written down at the time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jack Lorimer and I were very old friends before he married, and his
marriage to a first cousin of mine did not make, as so often happens, a
slackening in our intimacy. Within a few months after, it was found out
that his wife had consumption, and, without any loss of time, she was
sent off to Davos, with her sister to look after her. The disease had
evidently been detected at a very early stage, and there was excellent
ground for hoping that with proper care and strict regime she would be
cured by the life-giving frosts of that wonderful valley.

The two had gone out in the November of which I am speaking, and Jack
and I joined them for a month at Christmas, and found that week after
week she was steadily and quickly gaining ground. We had to be back in
town by the end of January, but it was settled that Ida should remain
out with her sister for a week or two more. They both, I remember, came
down to the station to see us off, and I am not likely to forget the
last words that passed:

“Oh, don’t look so woebegone Jack,” his wife had said; “you’ll see me
again before long.”

Then the fussy little mountain engine squeaked, as a puppy squeaks when
its toe is trodden on, and we puffed our way up the pass.

London was in its usual desperate February plight, when we got back,
full of fogs and still-born frosts that seemed to produce a cold far
more bitter than the piercing temperature of those sunny altitudes from
which we had come. We both, I think, felt rather lonely, and even before
we had got to our journey’s end we had settled that for the present it
was ridiculous that we should keep open two houses when one would
suffice, and would also be far more cheerful for us both. So, as we both
lived in almost identical houses in the same street in Chelsea, we
decided to “toss,” live in the house which the coin indicated (heads
mine, tails his) share expenses, attempt to let the other house, and, if
successful, share the proceeds. A French five-franc piece of the second
empire told us it was “heads.”

We had been back some ten days, receiving every day the most excellent
accounts from Davos, when, first on him, then on me, there descended
like some tropical storm, a feeling of indefinable fear. Very possibly
this sense of apprehension (for there is nothing in the world so
virulently infectious) reached me through him: on the other hand both
these attacks of vague foreboding may have come from the same source.
But it is true that it did not attack me till he spoke of it, so the
possibility perhaps inclines to my having caught it from him. He spoke
of it first, I remember, one evening when we had met for a good-night
talk, after having come back from separate houses where we had dined.

“I have felt most awfully down all day,” he said; “and just after
receiving this splendid account from Daisy, I can’t think what is the
matter.”

He poured himself out some whisky and soda as he spoke.

“Oh, touch of liver,” I said. “I shouldn’t drink that if I were you.
Give it me instead.”

“I was never better in my life,” he said.

I was opening letters, as we talked, and came across one from the house
agent, which, with trembling eagerness I read.

“Hurrah,” I cried, “offer of five guᵃˢ--why can’t he write it in proper
English--five guineas a week till Easter for number 31. We shall roll in
guineas!”

“Oh, but I can’t stop here till Easter,” he said.

“I don’t see why not. Nor by the way does Daisy. I heard from her this
morning, and she told me to persuade you to stop. That’s to say, if you
like. It really is more cheerful for you here. I forgot, you were
telling me something.”

The glorious news about the weekly guineas did not cheer him up in the
least.

“Thanks awfully. Of course I’ll stop.”

He moved up and down the room once or twice.

“No, it’s not me that is wrong,” he said, “it’s It, whatever It is. The
terror by night.”

“Which you are commanded not to be afraid of,” I remarked.

“I know: it’s easy commanding. I’m frightened: something’s coming.”

“Five guineas a week are coming,” I said. “I shan’t sit up and be
infected by your fears. All that matters, Davos, is going as well as it
can. What was the last report? Incredibly better. Take that to bed with
you.”

The infection--if infection it was--did not take hold of me then, for I
remember going to sleep feeling quite cheerful, but I awoke in some dark
still hour and It, the terror by night, had come while I slept. Fear and
misgiving, blind, unreasonable, and paralysing, had taken and gripped
me. What was it? Just as by an aneroid we can foretell the approach of
storm, so by this sinking of the spirit, unlike anything I had ever felt
before, I felt sure that disaster of some sort was presaged.

Jack saw it at once when we met at breakfast next morning, in the brown
haggard light of a foggy day, not dark enough for candles, but dismal
beyond all telling.

“So it has come to you too,” he said.

And I had not even the fighting-power left to tell him that I was merely
slightly unwell. Besides, never in my life had I felt better.

All next day, all the day after that fear lay like a black cloak over my
mind; I did not know what I dreaded, but it was something very acute,
something that was very near. It was coming nearer every moment,
spreading like a pall of clouds over the sky; but on the third day,
after miserably cowering under it, I suppose some sort of courage came
back to me: either this was pure imagination, some trick of disordered
nerves or what not, in which case we were both “disquieting ourselves in
vain,” or from the immeasurable waves of emotion that beat upon the
minds of men, something within both of us had caught a current, a
pressure. In either case it was infinitely better to try, however
ineffectively, to stand up against it. For these two days I had neither
worked nor played; I had only shrunk and shuddered; I planned for myself
a busy day, with diversion for us both in the evening.

“We will dine early,” I said, “and go to the ‘Man from Blankley’s.’ I
have already asked Philip to come, and he is coming, and I have
telephoned for tickets. Dinner at seven.”

Philip, I may remark, is an old friend of ours, neighbour in this
street, and by profession a much-respected doctor.

Jack laid down his paper.

“Yes, I expect you’re right,” he said. “It’s no use doing nothing, it
doesn’t help things. Did you sleep well?”

“Yes, beautifully,” I said rather snappishly, for I was all on edge
with the added burden of an almost sleepless night.

“I wish I had,” said he.

This would not do at all.

“We have got to play up!” I said. “Here are we two strong and stalwart
persons, with as much cause for satisfaction with life as any you can
mention, letting ourselves behave like worms. Our fear may be over
things imaginary or over things that are real, but it is the fact of
being afraid that is so despicable. There is nothing in the world to
fear except fear. You know that as well as I do. Now let’s read our
papers with interest. Which do you back, Mr Druce, or the Duke of
Portland, or the Times Book Club?”

That day, therefore, passed very busily for me; and there were enough
events moving in front of that black background, which I was conscious
was there all the time, to enable me to keep my eyes away from it, and I
was detained rather late at the office, and had to drive back to
Chelsea, in order to be in time to dress for dinner, instead of walking
back as I had intended.

Then the message, which for these three days, had been twittering in our
minds, the receivers, just making them quiver and rattle came through.

       *       *       *       *       *

I found Jack already dressed, since it was within a minute or two of
seven when I got in, and sitting in the drawing-room. The day had been
warm and muggy, but when I looked in on the way up to my room, it
seemed to me to have grown suddenly and bitterly cold, not with the
dampness of English frost, but with the clear and stinging exhilaration
of such days as we had recently spent in Switzerland. Fire was laid in
the grate but not lit, and I went down on my knees on the hearth-rug to
light it.

“Why, it’s freezing in here,” I said. “What donkeys servants are! It
never occurs to them that you want fires in cold weather, and no fires
in hot weather.”

“Oh, for heaven’s sake don’t light the fire,” said he, “it’s the warmest
muggiest evening I ever remember.”

I stared at him in astonishment. My hands were shaking with the cold. He
saw this.

“Why, you are shivering!” he said. “Have you caught a chill? But as to
the room being cold let us look at the thermometer.”

There was one on the writing-table.

“Sixty-five,” he said.

There was no disputing that, nor did I want to, for at that moment, it
suddenly struck us, dimly and distantly that It was “coming through.” I
felt it like some curious internal vibration.

“Hot or cold, I must go and dress,” I said.

Still shivering, but feeling as if I was breathing some rarefied
exhilarating air, I went up to my room. My clothes were already laid
out, but, by an oversight, no hot water had been brought up, and I rang
for my man. He came up almost at once, but he looked scared, or, to my
already-startled senses, he appeared so.

“What’s the matter?” I asked.

“Nothing, sir,” he said, and he could hardly articulate the words. “I
thought you rang.”

“Yes. Hot water. But what’s the matter?”

He shifted from one foot to the other.

“I thought I saw a lady on the stairs,” he said, “coming up close behind
me. And the front door bell hadn’t rung that I heard.”

“Where did you think you saw her?” I asked.

“On the stairs. Then on the landing outside the drawing-room door, sir,”
he said. “She stood there as if she didn’t know whether to go in or
not.”

“One--one of the servants,” I said. But again I felt that It was coming
through.

“No, sir. It was none of the servants,” he said.

“Who was it then?”

“Couldn’t see distinctly sir, it was dim-like. But I thought it was Mrs
Lorimer.”

“Oh, go and get me some hot water,” I said.

But he lingered; he was quite clearly frightened.

       *       *       *       *       *

At this moment the front-door bell rang. It was just seven, and already
Philip had come with brutal punctuality while I was not yet
half-dressed.

“That’s Dr Enderly,” I said. “Perhaps if he is on the stairs you may be
able to pass the place where you saw the lady.”

Then quite suddenly there rang through the house a scream, so terrible,
so appalling in its agony and supreme terror, that I simply stood still
and shuddered, unable to move. Then by an effort so violent that I felt
as if something must break, I recalled the power of motion, and ran
downstairs, my man at my heels, to meet Philip who was running up from
the ground floor. He had heard it too.

“What’s the matter?” he said. “What was that?”

       *       *       *       *       *

Together we went into the drawing-room, Jack was lying in front of the
fireplace, with the chair in which he had been sitting a few minutes
before overturned. Philip went straight to him and bent over him,
tearing open his white shirt.

“Open all the windows,” he said, “the place reeks.”

We flung open the windows, and there poured in, so it seemed to me, a
stream of hot air into the bitter cold. Eventually Philip got up.

“He is dead,” he said. “Keep the windows open. The place is still thick
with chloroform.”

Gradually to my sense the room got warmer, to Philip’s the drug-laden
atmosphere dispersed. But neither my servant nor I had smelt anything at
all.

A couple of hours later there came a telegram from Davos for me. It was
to tell me to break the news of Daisy’s death to Jack, and was sent by
her sister. She supposed he would come out immediately. But he had been
gone two hours now.

I left for Davos next day, and learned what had happened. Daisy had been
suffering for three days from a little abscess which had to be opened,
and, though the operation was of the slightest, she had been so nervous
about it that the doctor gave her chloroform. She made a good recovery
from the anæsthetic, but an hour later had a sudden attack of syncope,
and had died that night at a few minutes before eight, by central
European time, corresponding to seven in English time. She had insisted
that Jack should be told nothing about this little operation till it was
over, since the matter was quite unconnected with her general health,
and she did not wish to cause him needless anxiety.

And there the story ends. To my servant there came the sight of a woman
outside the drawing-room door, where Jack was, hesitating about her
entrance, at the moment when Daisy’s soul hovered between the two
worlds; to me there came--I do not think it is fanciful to suppose
this--the keen exhilarating cold of Davos; to Philip there came the
fumes of chloroform. And to Jack, I must suppose, came his wife. So he
joined her.




THE OTHER BED


I had gone out to Switzerland just before Christmas, expecting, from
experience, a month of divinely renovating weather, of skating all day
in brilliant sun, and basking in the hot frost of that windless
atmosphere. Occasionally, as I knew, there might be a snowfall, which
would last perhaps for forty-eight hours at the outside, and would be
succeeded by another ten days of cloudless perfection, cold even to zero
at night, but irradiated all day long by the unflecked splendour of the
sun.

Instead the climatic conditions were horrible. Day after day a gale
screamed through this upland valley that should have been so windless
and serene, bringing with it a tornado of sleet that changed to snow by
night. For ten days there was no abatement of it, and evening after
evening, as I consulted my barometer, feeling sure that the black finger
would show that we were coming to the end of these abominations, I found
that it had sunk a little lower yet, till it stayed, like a homing
pigeon, on the S of storm. I mention these things in depreciation of the
story that follows, in order that the intelligent reader may say at
once, if he wishes, that all that occurred was merely a result of the
malaise of nerves and digestion that perhaps arose from those
storm-bound and disturbing conditions. And now to go back to the
beginning again.

I had written to engage a room at the Hôtel Beau Site, and had been
agreeably surprised on arrival to find that for the modest sum of twelve
francs a day I was allotted a room on the first floor with two beds in
it. Otherwise the hotel was quite full. Fearing to be billeted in a
twenty-two-franc room, by mistake, I instantly confirmed my arrangements
at the bureau. There was no mistake: I had ordered a twelve-franc room
and had been given one. The very civil clerk hoped that I was satisfied
with it, for otherwise there was nothing vacant. I hastened to say that
I was more than satisfied, fearing the fate of Esau.

I arrived about three in the afternoon of a cloudless and glorious day,
the last of the series. I hurried down to the rink, having had the
prudence to put skates in the forefront of my luggage, and spent a
divine but struggling hour or two, coming up to the hotel about sunset.
I had letters to write, and after ordering tea to be sent up to my
gorgeous apartment, No. 23, on the first floor, I went straight up
there.

The door was ajar and--I feel certain I should not even remember this
now except in the light of what followed--just as I got close to it, I
heard some faint movement inside the room and instinctively knew that
my servant was there unpacking. Next moment I was in the room myself,
and it was empty. The unpacking had been finished, and everything was
neat, orderly, and comfortable. My barometer was on the table, and I
observed with dismay that it had gone down nearly half an inch. I did
not give another thought to the movement I thought I had heard from
outside.

Certainly I had a delightful room for my twelve francs a day. There
were, as I have said, two beds in it, on one of which were already laid
out my dress-clothes, while night-things were disposed on the other.
There were two windows, between which stood a large washing-stand, with
plenty of room on it; a sofa with its back to the light stood
conveniently near the pipes of central heating, there were a couple of
good arm-chairs, a writing table, and, rarest of luxuries, another
table, so that every time one had breakfast it was not necessary to pile
up a drift of books and papers to make room for the tray. My window
looked east, and sunset still flamed on the western faces of the virgin
snows, while above, in spite of the dejected barometer, the sky was bare
of clouds, and a thin slip of pale crescent moon was swung high among
the stars that still burned dimly in these first moments of their
kindling. Tea came up for me without delay, and, as I ate, I regarded my
surroundings with extreme complacency.

Then, quite suddenly and without cause, I saw that the disposition of
the beds would never do; I could not possibly sleep in the bed that my
servant had chosen for me, and without pause I jumped up, transferred my
dress clothes to the other bed, and put my night things where they had
been. It was done breathlessly almost, and not till then did I ask
myself why I had done it. I found I had not the slightest idea. I had
merely felt that I could not sleep in the other bed. But having made the
change I felt perfectly content.

My letters took me an hour or so to finish, and I had yawned and blinked
considerably over the last one or two, in part from their inherent
dullness, in part from quite natural sleepiness. For I had been in the
train for twenty-four hours, and was fresh to these bracing airs which
so conduce to appetite, activity, and sleep, and as there was still an
hour before I need dress, I lay down on my sofa with a book for excuse,
but the intention to slumber as reason. And consciousness ceased as if a
tap had been turned off.

Then--I dreamed. I dreamed that my servant came very quietly into the
room, to tell me no doubt that it was time to dress. I supposed there
were a few minutes to spare yet, and that he saw I was dozing, for,
instead of rousing me, he moved quietly about the room, setting things
in order. The light appeared to me to be very dim, for I could not see
him with any distinctness, indeed, I only knew it was he because it
could not be anybody else. Then he paused by my washing-stand, which had
a shelf for brushes and razors above it, and I saw him take a razor from
its case and begin stropping it; the light was strongly reflected on the
blade of the razor. He tried the edge once or twice on his thumbnail,
and then to my horror I saw him trying it on his throat. Instantaneously
one of those deafening dream-crashes awoke me, and I saw the door half
open, and my servant in the very act of coming in. No doubt the opening
of the door had constituted the crash.

I had joined a previously-arrived party of five, all of us old friends,
and accustomed to see each other often, and at dinner, and afterwards in
intervals of bridge, the conversation roamed agreeably over a variety of
topics, rocking-turns and the prospects of weather (a thing of vast
importance in Switzerland, and not a commonplace subject) and the
performances at the opera, and under what circumstances as revealed in
dummy’s hand, is it justifiable for a player to refuse to return his
partner’s original lead in no trumps. Then over whisky and soda and the
repeated “last cigarette,” it veered back via the Zantzigs to thought
transference and the transference of emotion. Here one of the party,
Harry Lambert, put forward the much discussed explanation of haunted
houses based on this principle. He put it very concisely.

“Everything that happens,” he said, “whether it is a step we take, or a
thought that crosses our mind, makes some change in its immediate
material world. Now the most violent and concentrated emotion we can
imagine is the emotion that leads a man to take so extreme a step as
killing himself or somebody else. I can easily imagine such a deed so
eating into the material scene, the room or the haunted heath, where it
happens, that its mark lasts an enormous time. The air rings with the
cry of the slain and still drips with his blood. It is not everybody who
will perceive it, but sensitives will. By the way, I am sure that man
who waits on us at dinner is a sensitive.”

It was already late, and I rose.

“Let us hurry him to the scene of a crime,” I said. “For myself I shall
hurry to the scene of sleep.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside the threatening promise of the barometer was already finding
fulfilment, and a cold ugly wind was complaining among the pines, and
hooting round the peaks, and snow had begun to fall. The night was
thickly overcast, and it seemed as if uneasy presences were going to and
fro in the darkness. But there was no use in ill augury, and certainly
if we were to be house-bound for a few days I was lucky in having so
commodious a lodging. I had plenty to occupy myself with indoors, though
I should vastly have preferred to be engaged outside, and in the
immediate present how good it was to lie free in a proper bed after a
cramped night in the train.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was half-undressed when there came a tap at my door, and the waiter
who had served us at dinner came in carrying a bottle of whisky. He was
a tall young fellow, and though I had not noticed him at dinner, I saw
at once now, as he stood in the glare of the electric light, what Harry
had meant when he said he was sure he was a sensitive. There is no
mistaking that look: it is exhibited in a peculiar “inlooking” of the
eye. Those eyes, one knows, see further than the surface....

“The bottle of whisky for monsieur,” he said, putting it down on the
table.

“But I ordered no whisky,” said I.

He looked puzzled.

“Number twenty-three?” he said.

Then he glanced at the other bed.

“Ah, for the other gentleman, without doubt,” he said.

“But there is no other gentleman,” said I. “I am alone here.”

He took up the bottle again.

“Pardon, monsieur,” he said. “There must be a mistake. I am new here; I
only came to-day. But I thought----”

“Yes?” said I.

“I thought that number twenty-three had ordered a bottle of whisky,” he
repeated. “Good-night, monsieur, and pardon.”

       *       *       *       *       *

I got into bed, extinguished the light, and feeling very sleepy and
heavy with the oppression, no doubt, of the snow that was coming,
expected to fall asleep at once. Instead my mind would not quite go to
roost, but kept sleepily stumbling about among the little events of the
day, as some tired pedestrian in the dark stumbles over stones instead
of lifting his feet. And as I got sleepier it seemed to me that my mind
kept moving in a tiny little circle. At one moment it drowsily
recollected how I had thought I had heard movement inside my room, at
the next it remembered my dream of some figure going stealthily about
and stropping a razor, at a third it wondered why this Swiss waiter with
the eyes of a “sensitive” thought that number twenty-three had ordered a
bottle of whisky. But at the time I made no guess as to any coherence
between these little isolated facts; I only dwelt on them with drowsy
persistence. Then a fourth fact came to join the sleepy circle, and I
wondered why I had felt a repugnance against using the other bed. But
there was no explanation of this forthcoming, either, and the outlines
of thought grew more blurred and hazy, until I lost consciousness
altogether.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning began the series of awful days, sleet and snow falling
relentlessly with gusts of chilly wind, making any out-of-door
amusement next to impossible. The snow was too soft for toboganning, it
balled on the skies, and as for the rink it was but a series of pools of
slushy snow. This in itself, of course, was quite enough to account for
any ordinary depression and heaviness of spirit, but all the time I felt
there was something more than that to which I owed the utter blackness
that hung over those days. I was beset too by fear that at first was
only vague, but which gradually became more definite, until it resolved
itself into a fear of number twenty-three and in particular a terror of
the other bed. I had no notion why or how I was afraid of it, the thing
was perfectly causeless, but the shape and the outline of it grew slowly
clearer, as detail after detail of ordinary life, each minute and
trivial in itself, carved and moulded this fear, till it became
definite. Yet the whole thing was so causeless and childish that I could
speak to no one of it; I could but assure myself that it was all a
figment of nerves disordered by this unseemly weather.

However, as to the details, there were plenty of them. Once I woke up
from strangling nightmare, unable at first to move, but in a panic of
terror, believing that I was sleeping in the other bed. More than once,
too, awaking before I was called, and getting out of bed to look at the
aspect of the morning, I saw with a sense of dreadful misgiving that the
bed-clothes on the other bed were strangely disarranged, as if some one
had slept there, and smoothed them down afterwards, but not so well as
not to give notice of the occupation. So one night I laid a trap, so to
speak, for the intruder, of which the real object was to calm my own
nervousness (for I still told myself that I was frightened of nothing),
and tucked in the sheet very carefully, laying the pillow on the top of
it. But in the morning it seemed as if my interference had not been to
the taste of the occupant, for there was more impatient disorder than
usual in the bed-clothes, and on the pillow was an indentation, round
and rather deep, such as we may see any morning in our own beds. Yet by
day these things did not frighten me, but it was when I went to bed at
night that I quaked at the thought of further developments.

It happened also from time to time that I wanted something brought me,
or wanted my servant. On three or four of these occasions my bell was
answered by the “Sensitive,” as we called him, but the Sensitive, I
noticed, never came into the room. He would open the door a chink to
receive my order, and on returning would again open it a chink to say
that my boots, or whatever it was, were at the door. Once I made him
come in, but I saw him cross himself as, with a face of icy terror, he
stepped into the room, and the sight somehow did not reassure me. Twice
also he came up in the evening, when I had not rung at all, even as he
came up the first night, and opened the door a chink to say that my
bottle of whisky was outside. But the poor fellow was in a state of such
bewilderment when I went out and told him that I had not ordered whisky,
that I did not press for an explanation. He begged my pardon profusely;
he thought a bottle of whisky had been ordered for number twenty-three.
It was his mistake, entirely--I should not be charged for it; it must
have been the other gentleman. Pardon again; he remembered there was no
other gentleman, the other bed was unoccupied.

It was on the night when this happened for the second time that I
definitely began to wish that I too was quite certain that the other bed
was unoccupied. The ten days of snow and sleet were at an end, and
to-night the moon once more, grown from a mere slip to a shining shield,
swung serenely among the stars. But though at dinner everyone exhibited
an extraordinary change of spirit, with the rising of the barometer and
the discharge of this huge snow-fall, the intolerable gloom which had
been mine so long but deepened and blackened. The fear was to me now
like some statue, nearly finished, modelled by the carving hands of
these details, and though it still stood below its moistened sheet, any
moment, I felt, the sheet might be twitched away, and I be confronted
with it. Twice that evening I had started to go to the bureau, to ask to
have a bed made up for me, anywhere, in the billiard-room or the
smoking-room, since the hotel was full, but the intolerable childishness
of the proceeding revolted me. What was I afraid of? A dream of my own,
a mere nightmare? Some fortuitous disarrangement of bed-linen? The fact
that a Swiss waiter made mistakes about bottles of whisky? It was an
impossible cowardice.

But equally impossible that night were billiards or bridge, or any form
of diversion. My only salvation seemed to lie in downright hard work,
and soon after dinner I went to my room (in order to make my first real
counter-move against fear) and sat down solidly to several hours of
proof-correcting, a menial and monotonous employment, but one which is
necessary, and engages the entire attention. But first I looked
thoroughly round the room, to reassure myself, and found all modern and
solid; a bright paper of daisies on the wall, a floor parquetted, the
hot-water pipes chuckling to themselves in the corner, my bed-clothes
turned down for the night, the other bed----

The electric light was burning brightly, and there seemed to me to be a
curious stain, as of a shadow, on the lower part of the pillow and the
top of the sheet, definite and suggestive, and for a moment I stood
there again throttled by a nameless terror. Then taking my courage in my
hands I went closer and looked at it. Then I touched it; the sheet,
where the stain or shadow was, seemed damp to the hand, so also was the
pillow. And then I remembered; I had thrown some wet clothes on the bed
before dinner. No doubt that was the reason. And fortified by this
extremely simple dissipation of my fear, I sat down and began on my
proofs. But my fear had been this, that the stain had not in that first
moment looked like the mere greyness of water-moistened linen.

From below, at first, came the sound of music, for they were dancing
to-night, but I grew absorbed in my work, and only recorded the fact
that after a time there was no more music. Steps went along the
passages, and I heard the buzz of conversation on landings, and the
closing of doors till by degrees the silence became noticeable. The
loneliness of night had come.

It was after the silence had become lonely that I made the first pause
in my work, and by the watch on my table saw that it was already past
midnight. But I had little more to do; another half-hour would see the
end of the business, but there were certain notes I had to make for
future reference, and my stock of paper was already exhausted. However,
I had bought some in the village that afternoon, and it was in the
bureau downstairs, where I had left it, when I came in and had
subsequently forgotten to bring it upstairs. It would be the work of a
minute only to get it.

The electric light had brightened considerably during the last hour,
owing no doubt to many burners being put out in the hotel, and as I left
the room I saw again the stain on the pillow and sheet of the other bed.
I had really forgotten all about it for the last hour, and its presence
there came as an unwelcome surprise. Then I remembered the explanation
of it, which had struck me before, and for purposes of self-reassurement
I again touched it. It was still damp, but--Had I got chilly with my
work? For it was warm to the hand. Warm, and surely rather sticky. It
did not seem like the touch of the water-damp. And at the same moment I
knew I was not alone in the room. There was something there, something
silent as yet, and as yet invisible. But it was there.

Now for the consolation of persons who are inclined to be fearful, I may
say at once that I am in no way brave, but that terror which, God knows,
was real enough, was yet so interesting, that interest overruled it. I
stood for a moment by the other bed, and, half-consciously only, wiped
the hand that had felt the stain, for the touch of it, though all the
time I told myself that it was but the touch of the melted snow on the
coat I had put there, was unpleasant and unclean. More than that I did
not feel, because in the presence of the unknown and the perhaps awful,
the sense of curiosity, one of the strongest instincts we have, came to
the fore. So, rather eager to get back to my room again, I ran
downstairs to get the packet of paper. There was still a light in the
bureau, and the Sensitive, on night-duty, I suppose, was sitting there
dozing. My entrance did not disturb him, for I had on noiseless felt
slippers, and seeing at once the package I was in search of, I took it,
and left him still unawakened. That was somehow of a fortifying nature.
The Sensitive anyhow could sleep in his hard chair; the occupant of the
unoccupied bed was not calling to him to-night.

I closed my door quietly, as one does at night when the house is silent,
and sat down at once to open my packet of paper and finish my work. It
was wrapped up in an old news-sheet, and struggling with the last of the
string that bound it, certain words caught my eye. Also the date at the
top of the paper caught my eye, a date nearly a year old, or, to be
quite accurate, a date fifty-one weeks old. It was an American paper and
what it recorded was this:

“The body of Mr Silas R. Hume, who committed suicide last week at the
Hôtel Beau Site, Moulin sur Chalons, is to be buried at his house in
Boston, Mass. The inquest held in Switzerland showed that he cut his
throat with a razor, in an attack of delirium tremens induced by drink.
In the cupboard of his room were found three dozen empty bottles of
Scotch whisky....”

So far I had read when without warning the electric light went out, and
I was left in, what seemed for the moment, absolute darkness. And again
I knew I was not alone, and I knew now who it was who was with me in the
room.

Then the absolute paralysis of fear seized me. As if a wind had blown
over my head, I felt the hair of it stir and rise a little. My eyes
also, I suppose, became accustomed to the sudden darkness, for they
could now perceive the shape of the furniture in the room from the light
of the starlit sky outside. They saw more too than the mere furniture.
There was standing by the wash-stand between the two windows a figure,
clothed only in night-garments, and its hands moved among the objects on
the shelf above the basin. Then with two steps it made a sort of dive
for the other bed, which was in shadow. And then the sweat poured on to
my forehead.

Though the other bed stood in shadow I could still see dimly, but
sufficiently, what was there. The shape of a head lay on the pillow, the
shape of an arm lifted its hand to the electric bell that was close by
on the wall, and I fancied I could hear it distantly ringing. Then a
moment later came hurrying feet up the stairs and along the passage
outside, and a quick rapping at my door.

“Monsieur’s whisky, monsieur’s whisky,” said a voice just outside.
“Pardon, monsieur, I brought it as quickly as I could.”

The impotent paralysis of cold terror was still on me. Once I tried to
speak and failed, and still the gentle tapping went on at the door, and
the voice telling some one that his whisky was there. Then at a second
attempt, I heard a voice which was mine saying hoarsely:

“For God’s sake come in; I am alone with it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

There was the click of a turned door-handle, and as suddenly as it had
gone out a few seconds before, the electric light came back again, and
the room was in full illumination. I saw a face peer round the corner of
the door, but it was at another face I looked, the face of a man sallow
and shrunken, who lay in the other bed, staring at me with glazed eyes.
He lay high in bed, and his throat was cut from ear to ear; and the
lower part of the pillow was soaked in blood, and the sheet streamed
with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then suddenly that hideous vision vanished, and there was only a
sleepy-eyed waiter looking into the room. But below the sleepiness
terror was awake, and his voice shook when he spoke.

“Monsieur rang?” he asked.

No, monsieur had not rung. But monsieur made himself a couch in the
billiard-room.




THE THING IN THE HALL


The following pages are the account given me by Dr Assheton of the Thing
in the Hall. I took notes, as copious as my quickness of hand allowed
me, from his dictation, and subsequently read to him this narrative in
its transcribed and connected form. This was on the day before his
death, which indeed probably occurred within an hour after I had left
him, and, as readers of inquests and such atrocious literature may
remember, I had to give evidence before the coroner’s jury. Only a week
before Dr Assheton had to give similar evidence, but as a medical
expert, with regard to the death of his friend, Louis Fielder, which
occurred in a manner identical with his own. As a specialist, he said he
believed that his friend had committed suicide while of unsound mind,
and the verdict was brought in accordingly. But in the inquest held over
Dr Assheton’s body, though the verdict eventually returned was the same,
there was more room for doubt.

For I was bound to state that only shortly before his death, I read what
follows to him; that he corrected me with extreme precision on a few
points of detail, that he seemed perfectly himself, and that at the end
he used these words:

“I am quite certain as a brain specialist that I am completely sane, and
that these things happened not merely in my imagination, but in the
external world. If I had to give evidence again about poor Louis, I
should be compelled to take a different line. Please put that down at
the end of your account, or at the beginning, if it arranges itself
better so.”

There will be a few words I must add at the end of this story, and a few
words of explanation must precede it. Briefly, they are these.

Francis Assheton and Louis Fielder were up at Cambridge together, and
there formed the friendship that lasted nearly till their death. In
general attributes no two men could have been less alike, for while Dr
Assheton had become at the age of thirty-five the first and final
authority on his subject, which was the functions and diseases of the
brain, Louis Fielder at the same age was still on the threshold of
achievement. Assheton, apparently without any brilliance at all, had by
careful and incessant work arrived at the top of his profession, while
Fielder, brilliant at school, brilliant at college and brilliant ever
afterwards, had never done anything. He was too eager, so it seemed to
his friends, to set about the dreary work of patient investigation and
logical deductions; he was for ever guessing and prying, and striking
out luminous ideas, which he left burning, so to speak, to illumine the
work of others. But at bottom, the two men had this compelling interest
in common, namely, an insatiable curiosity after the unknown, perhaps
the most potent bond yet devised between the solitary units that make up
the race of man. Both--till the end--were absolutely fearless, and Dr
Assheton would sit by the bedside of the man stricken with bubonic
plague to note the gradual surge of the tide of disease to the reasoning
faculty with the same absorption as Fielder would study X-rays one week,
flying machines the next, and spiritualism the third. The rest of the
story, I think, explains itself--or does not quite do so. This, anyhow,
is what I read to Dr Assheton, being the connected narrative of what he
had himself told me. It is he, of course, who speaks.

       *       *       *       *       *

“After I returned from Paris, where I had studied under Charcot, I set
up practice at home. The general doctrine of hypnotism, suggestion, and
cure by such means had been accepted even in London by this time, and,
owing to a few papers I had written on the subject, together with my
foreign diplomas, I found that I was a busy man almost as soon as I had
arrived in town. Louis Fielder had his ideas about how I should make my
début (for he had ideas on every subject, and all of them original), and
entreated me to come and live not in the stronghold of doctors,
‘Chloroform Square,’ as he called it, but down in Chelsea, where there
was a house vacant next his own.

‘Who cares where a doctor lives,’ he said, ‘so long as he cures people?
Besides you don’t believe in old methods; why believe in old localities?
Oh, there is an atmosphere of painless death in Chloroform Square! Come
and make people live instead! And on most evenings I shall have so much
to tell you; I can’t “drop in” across half London.’

Now if you have been abroad for five years, it is a great deal to know
that you have any intimate friend at all still left in the metropolis,
and, as Louis said, to have that intimate friend next door, is an
excellent reason for going next door. Above all, I remembered from
Cambridge days, what Louis’ ‘dropping in’ meant. Towards bed-time, when
work was over, there would come a rapid step on the landing, and for an
hour, or two hours, he would gush with ideas. He simply diffused life,
which is ideas, wherever he went. He fed one’s brain, which is the one
thing which matters. Most people who are ill, are ill because their
brain is starving, and the body rebels, and gets lumbago or cancer. That
is the chief doctrine of my work such as it has been. All bodily disease
springs from the brain. It is merely the brain that has to be fed and
rested and exercised properly to make the body absolutely healthy, and
immune from all disease. But when the brain is affected, it is as useful
to pour medicines down the sink, as make your patient swallow them,
unless--and this is a paramount limitation--unless he believes in them.

I said something of the kind to Louis one night, when, at the end of a
busy day, I had dined with him. We were sitting over coffee in the hall,
or so it is called, where he takes his meals. Outside, his house is just
like mine, and ten thousand other small houses in London, but on
entering, instead of finding a narrow passage with a door on one side,
leading into the dining-room, which again communicates with a small back
room called ‘the study,’ he has had the sense to eliminate all
unnecessary walls, and consequently the whole ground floor of his house
is one room, with stairs leading up to the first floor. Study,
dining-room and passage have been knocked into one; you enter a big room
from the front door. The only drawback is that the postman makes loud
noises close to you, as you dine, and just as I made these commonplace
observations to him about the effect of the brain on the body and the
senses, there came a loud rap, somewhere close to me, that was
startling.

‘You ought to muffle your knocker,’ I said, ‘anyhow during the time of
meals.’

Louis leaned back and laughed.

‘There isn’t a knocker,’ he said. ‘You were startled a week ago, and
said the same thing. So I took the knocker off. The letters slide in
now. But you heard a knock, did you?’

‘Didn’t you?’ said I.

‘Why, certainly. But it wasn’t the postman. It was the Thing. I don’t
know what it is. That makes it so interesting.’

Now if there is one thing that the hypnotist, the believer in
unexplained influences, detests and despises, it is the whole
root-notion of spiritualism. Drugs are not more opposed to his belief
than the exploded, discredited idea of the influence of spirits on our
lives. And both are discredited for the same reason; it is easy to
understand how brain can act on brain, just as it is easy to understand
how body can act on body, so that there is no more difficulty in the
reception of the idea that the strong mind can direct the weak one, than
there is in the fact of a wrestler of greater strength overcoming one of
less. But that spirits should rap at furniture and divert the course of
events is as absurd as administering phosphorus to strengthen the brain.
That was what I thought then.

However, I felt sure it was the postman, and instantly rose and went to
the door. There were no letters in the box, and I opened the door. The
postman was just ascending the steps. He gave the letters into my hand.

Louis was sipping his coffee when I came back to the table.

‘Have you ever tried table-turning?’ he asked. ‘It’s rather odd.’

‘No, and I have not tried violet-leaves as a cure for cancer,’ I said.

‘Oh, try everything,’ he said. ‘I know that that is your plan, just as
it is mine. All these years that you have been away, you have tried all
sorts of things, first with no faith, then with just a little faith, and
finally with mountain-moving faith. Why, you didn’t believe in hypnotism
at all when you went to Paris.’

He rang the bell as he spoke, and his servant came up and cleared the
table. While this was being done we strolled about the room, looking at
prints, with applause for a Bartolozzi that Louis had bought in the New
Cut, and dead silence over a ‘Perdita’ which he had acquired at
considerable cost. Then he sat down again at the table on which we had
dined. It was round, and mahogany-heavy, with a central foot divided
into claws.

‘Try its weight,’ he said; ‘see if you can push it about.’

So I held the edge of it in my hands, and found that I could just move
it. But that was all; it required the exercise of a good deal of
strength to stir it.

‘Now put your hands on the top of it,’ he said, ‘and see what you can
do.’

I could not do anything, my fingers merely slipped about on it. But I
protested at the idea of spending the evening thus.

‘I would much sooner play chess or noughts and crosses with you,’ I
said, ‘or even talk about politics, than turn tables. You won’t mean to
push, nor shall I, but we shall push without meaning to.’

Louis nodded.

‘Just a minute,’ he said, ‘let us both put our fingers only on the top
of the table and push for all we are worth, from right to left.’

We pushed. At least I pushed, and I observed his finger-nails. From pink
they grew to white, because of the pressure he exercised. So I must
assume that he pushed too. Once, as we tried this, the table creaked.
But it did not move.

Then there came a quick peremptory rap, not I thought on the front door,
but somewhere in the room.

‘It’s the Thing,’ said he.

To-day, as I speak to you, I suppose it was. But on that evening it
seemed only like a challenge. I wanted to demonstrate its absurdity.

‘For five years, on and off, I’ve been studying rank spiritualism,’ he
said. ‘I haven’t told you before, because I wanted to lay before you
certain phenomena, which I can’t explain, but which now seem to me to be
at my command. You shall see and hear, and then decide if you will help
me.’

‘And in order to let me see better, you are proposing to put out the
lights,’ I said.

‘Yes; you will see why.’

‘I am here as a sceptic,’ said I.

‘Scep away,’ said he.

Next moment the room was in darkness, except for a very faint glow of
firelight. The window-curtains were thick, and no street-illumination
penetrated them, and the familiar, cheerful sounds of pedestrians and
wheeled traffic came in muffled. I was at the side of the table towards
the door; Louis was opposite me, for I could see his figure dimly
silhouetted against the glow from the smouldering fire.

‘Put your hands on the table,’ he said, ‘quite lightly, and--how shall I
say it--expect.’

Still protesting in spirit, I expected. I could hear his breathing
rather quickened, and it seemed to me odd that anybody could find
excitement in standing in the dark over a large mahogany table,
expecting. Then--through my finger-tips, laid lightly on the table,
there began to come a faint vibration, like nothing so much as the
vibration through the handle of a kettle when water is beginning to boil
inside it. This got gradually more pronounced and violent till it was
like the throbbing of a motor-car. It seemed to give off a low humming
note. Then quite suddenly the table seemed to slip from under my fingers
and began very slowly to revolve.

‘Keep your hands on it and move with it,’ said Louis, and as he spoke I
saw his silhouette pass away from in front of the fire, moving as the
table moved.

For some moments there was silence, and we continued, rather absurdly,
to circle round keeping step, so to speak, with the table. Then Louis
spoke again, and his voice was trembling with excitement.

‘Are you there?’ he said.

There was no reply, of course, and he asked it again. This time there
came a rap like that which I had thought during dinner to be the
postman. But whether it was that the room was dark, or that despite
myself I felt rather excited too, it seemed to me now to be far louder
than before. Also it appeared to come neither from here nor there, but
to be diffused through the room.

Then the curious revolving of the table ceased, but the intense, violent
throbbing continued. My eyes were fixed on it, though owing to the
darkness I could see nothing, when quite suddenly a little speck of
light moved across it, so that for an instant I saw my own hands. Then
came another and another, like the spark of matches struck in the dark,
or like fire-flies crossing the dusk in southern gardens. Then came
another knock of shattering loudness, and the throbbing of the table
ceased, and the lights vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such were the phenomena at the first séance at which I was present, but
Fielder, it must be remembered, had been studying, ‘expecting,’ he
called it, for some years. To adopt spiritualistic language (which at
that time I was very far from doing), he was the medium, I merely the
observer, and all the phenomena I had seen that night were habitually
produced or witnessed by him. I make this limitation since he told me
that certain of them now appeared to be outside his own control
altogether. The knockings would come when his mind, as far as he knew,
was entirely occupied in other matters, and sometimes he had even been
awakened out of sleep by them. The lights were also independent of his
volition.

Now my theory at the time was that all these things were purely
subjective in him, and that what he expressed by saying that they were
out of his control, meant that they had become fixed and rooted in the
unconscious self, of which we know so little, but which, more and more,
we see to play so enormous a part in the life of a man. In fact, it is
not too much to say that the vast majority of our deeds spring,
apparently without volition, from this unconscious self. All hearing is
the unconscious exercise of the aural nerve, all seeing of the optic,
all walking, all ordinary movement seem to be done without the exercise
of will on our part. Nay more, should we take to some new form of
progression, skating, for instance, the beginner will learn with falls
and difficulty the outside edge, but within a few hours of his having
learned his balance on it, he will give no more thought to what he
learned so short a time ago as an acrobatic feat, than he gives to the
placing of one foot before the other.

But to the brain specialist all this was intensely interesting, and to
the student of hypnotism, as I was, even more so, for (such was the
conclusion I came to after this first séance), the fact that I saw and
heard just what Louis saw and heard was an exhibition of
thought-transference which in all my experience in the Charcot-schools I
had never seen surpassed, if indeed rivalled. I knew that I was myself
extremely sensitive to suggestion, and my part in it this evening I
believed to be purely that of the receiver of suggestions so vivid that
I visualised and heard these phenomena which existed only in the brain
of my friend.

We talked over what had occurred upstairs. His view was that the Thing
was trying to communicate with us. According to him it was the Thing
that moved the table and tapped, and made us see streaks of light.

‘Yes, but the Thing,’ I interrupted, ‘what do you mean? Is it a
great-uncle--oh, I have seen so many relatives appear at séances, and
heard so many of their dreadful platitudes--or what is it? A spirit?
Whose spirit?’

Louis was sitting opposite to me, and on the little table before us
there was an electric light. Looking at him I saw the pupil of his eye
suddenly dilate. To the medical man--provided that some violent change
in the light is not the cause of the dilation--that meant only one
thing, terror. But it quickly resumed its normal proportion again.

Then he got up, and stood in front of the fire.

‘No, I don’t think it is great-uncle anybody,’ he said, ‘I don’t know,
as I told you, what the Thing is. But if you ask me what my conjecture
is, it is that the Thing is an Elemental.’

‘And pray explain further. What is an Elemental?’

Once again his eye dilated.

‘It will take two minutes,’ he said. ‘But, listen. There are good things
in this world, are there not, and bad things? Cancer, I take it is bad,
and--and fresh air is good; honesty is good, lying is bad. Impulses of
some sort direct both sides, and some power suggests the impulses. Well,
I went into this spiritualistic business impartially. I learned to
“expect,” to throw open the door into the soul, and I said, “Anyone may
come in.” And I think Something has applied for admission, the Thing
that tapped and turned the table and struck matches, as you saw, across
it. Now the control of the evil principle in the world is in the hands
of a power which entrusts its errands to the things which I call
Elementals. Oh, they have been seen; I doubt not that they will be seen
again. I did not, and do not ask good spirits to come in. I don’t want
“The Church’s one foundation” played on a musical box. Nor do I _want_
an Elemental. I only threw open the door. I believe the Thing has come
into my house, and is establishing communication with me. Oh, I want to
go the whole hog. What is it? In the name of Satan, if necessary, what
is it? I just want to know.’

       *       *       *       *       *

What followed I thought then might easily be an invention of the
imagination, but what I believed to have happened was this. A piano with
music on it was standing at the far end of the room by the door, and a
sudden draught entered the room, so strong that the leaves turned. Next
the draught troubled a vase of daffodils, and the yellow heads nodded.
Then it reached the candles that stood close to us, and they fluttered,
burning blue and low. Then it reached me, and the draught was cold, and
stirred my hair. Then it eddied, so to speak, and went across to Louis,
and his hair also moved, as I could see. Then it went downwards towards
the fire, and flames suddenly started up in its path, blown upwards. The
rug by the fireplace flapped also.

‘Funny, wasn’t it?’ he asked.

‘And has the Elementa gone up the chimney?’ said I.

‘Oh, no,’ said he, ‘the Thing only passed us.’

Then suddenly he pointed at the wall just behind my chair, and his voice
cracked as he spoke.

‘Look, what’s that?’ he said. ‘There on the wall.’

Considerably startled I turned in the direction of his shaking finger.
The wall was pale grey in tone, and sharp-cut against it was a shadow
that, as I looked, moved. It was like the shadow of some enormous slug,
legless and fat, some two feet high by about four feet long. Only at one
end of it was a head shaped like the head of a seal, with open mouth and
panting tongue.

Then even as I looked it faded, and from somewhere close at hand there
sounded another of those shattering knocks.

For a moment after there was silence between us, and horror was thick as
snow in the air. But, somehow neither Louis or I were frightened for
more than one moment. The whole thing was so absorbingly interesting.

‘That’s what I mean by its being outside my control,’ he said. ‘I said I
was ready for any--any visitor to come in, and by God, we’ve got a
beauty.’

       *       *       *       *       *

Now I was still, even in spite of the appearance of this shadow, quite
convinced that I was only taking observations of a most curious case of
disordered brain accompanied by the most vivid and remarkable
thought-transference. I believed that I had not seen a slug-like shadow
at all, but that Louis had visualised this dreadful creature so
intensely that I saw what he saw. I found also that his spiritualistic
trash-books which I thought a truer nomenclature than text-books,
mentioned this as a common form for Elementals to take. He on the other
hand was more firmly convinced than ever that we were dealing not with a
subjective but an objective phenomenon.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next six months or so we sat constantly, but made no further
progress, nor did the Thing or its shadow appear again, and I began to
feel that we were really wasting time. Then it occurred to me, to get in
a so-called medium, induce hypnotic sleep, and see if we could learn
anything further. This we did, sitting as before round the dining-room
table. The room was not quite dark, and I could see sufficiently clearly
what happened.

The medium, a young man, sat between Louis and myself, and without the
slightest difficulty I put him into a light hypnotic sleep. Instantly
there came a series of the most terrific raps, and across the table
there slid something more palpable than a shadow, with a faint luminance
about it, as if the surface of it was smouldering. At the moment the
medium’s face became contorted to a mask of hellish terror; mouth and
eyes were both open, and the eyes were focussed on something close to
him. The Thing waving its head came closer and closer to him, and
reached out towards his throat. Then with a yell of panic, and warding
off this horror with his hands, the medium sprang up, but It had already
caught hold, and for the moment he could not get free. Then
simultaneously Louis and I went to his aid, and my hands touched
something cold and slimy. But pull as we could we could not get it away.
There was no firm hand-hold to be taken; it was as if one tried to grasp
slimy fur, and the touch of it was horrible, unclean, like a leper.
Then, in a sort of despair, though I still could not believe that the
horror was real, for it must be a vision of diseased imagination, I
remembered that the switch of the four electric lights was close to my
hand. I turned them all on. There on the floor lay the medium, Louis was
kneeling by him with a face of wet paper, but there was nothing else
there. Only the collar of the medium was crumpled and torn, and on his
throat were two scratches that bled.

The medium was still in hypnotic sleep, and I woke him. He felt at his
collar, put his hand to his throat and found it bleeding, but, as I
expected, knew nothing whatever of what had passed. We told him that
there had been an unusual manifestation, and he had, while in sleep,
wrestled with something. We had got the result we wished for, and were
much obliged to him.

I never saw him again. A week after that he died of blood-poisoning.

       *       *       *       *       *

From that evening dates the second stage of this adventure. The Thing
had materialised (I use again spiritualistic language which I still did
not use at the time). The huge slug, the Elemental, manifested itself
no longer by knocks and waltzing tables, nor yet by shadows. It was
there in a form that could be seen and felt. But it still--this was my
strong point--was only a thing of twilight; the sudden kindling of the
electric light had shown us that there was nothing there. In this
struggle perhaps the medium had clutched his own throat, perhaps I had
grasped Louis’ sleeve, he mine. But though I said these things to
myself, I am not sure that I believed them in the same way that I
believe the sun will rise to-morrow.

Now as a student of brain-functions and a student in hypnotic affairs, I
ought perhaps to have steadily and unremittingly pursued this
extraordinary series of phenomena. But I had my practice to attend to,
and I found that with the best will in the world, I could think of
nothing else except the occurrence in the hall next door. So I refused
to take part in any further séance with Louis. I had another reason
also. For the last four or five months he was becoming depraved. I have
been no prude or Puritan in my own life, and I hope I have not turned a
Pharisaical shoulder on sinners. But in all branches of life and morals,
Louis had become infamous. He was turned out of a club for cheating at
cards, and narrated the event to me with gusto. He had become cruel; he
tortured his cat to death; he had become bestial. I used to shudder as I
passed his house, expecting I knew not what fiendish thing to be
looking at me from the window.

Then came a night only a week ago, when I was awakened by an awful cry,
swelling and falling and rising again. It came from next door. I ran
downstairs in my pyjamas, and out into the street. The policeman on the
beat had heard it too, and it came from the hall of Louis’ house, the
window of which was open. Together we burst the door in. You know what
we found. The screaming had ceased but a moment before, but he was dead
already. Both jugulars were severed, torn open.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was dawn, early and dusky when I got back to my house next door. Even
as I went in something seemed to push by me, something soft and slimy.
It could not be Louis’ imagination this time. Since then I have seen
glimpses of it every evening. I am awakened at night by tappings, and in
the shadows in the corner of my room there sits something more
substantial than a shadow.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Within an hour of my leaving Dr Assheton, the quiet street was once more
aroused by cries of terror and agony. He was already dead, and in no
other manner than his friend, when they got into the house.




THE HOUSE WITH THE BRICK-KILN


The hamlet of Trevor Major lies very lonely and sequestered in a hollow
below the north side of the south downs that stretch westward from
Lewes, and run parallel with the coast. It is a hamlet of some three or
four dozen inconsiderable houses and cottages much girt about with
trees, but the big Norman church and the manor house which stands a
little outside the village are evidence of a more conspicuous past. This
latter, except for a tenancy of rather less than three weeks, now four
years ago, has stood unoccupied since the summer of 1896, and though it
could be taken at a rent almost comically small, it is highly improbable
that either of its last tenants, even if times were very bad, would
think of passing a night in it again. For myself--I was one of the
tenants--I would far prefer living in a workhouse to inhabiting those
low-pitched oak-panelled rooms, and I would sooner look from my garret
windows on to the squalor and grime of Whitechapel than from the
diamond-shaped and leaded panes of the Manor of Trevor Major on to the
boskage of its cool thickets, and the glimmering of its clear
chalk-streams where the quick trout glance among the waving water-weeds
and over the chalk and gravel of its sliding rapids.

It was the news of these trout that led Jack Singleton and myself to
take the house for the month between mid-May and mid-June, but as I have
already mentioned a short three weeks was all the time we passed there,
and we had more than a week of our tenancy yet unexpired when we left
the place, though on the very last afternoon we enjoyed the finest
dry-fly fishing that has ever fallen to my lot. Singleton had originally
seen the advertisement of the house in a Sussex paper, with the
statement that there was good dry-fly fishing belonging to it, but it
was with but faint hopes of the reality of the dry-fly fishing that we
went down to look at the place, since we had before this so often
inspected depopulated ditches which were offered to the unwary under
high-sounding titles. Yet after a half-hour’s stroll by the stream, we
went straight back to the agent, and before nightfall had taken it for a
month with option of renewal.

       *       *       *       *       *

We arrived accordingly from town at about five o’clock on a cloudless
afternoon in May, and through the mists of horror that now stand between
me and the remembrance of what occurred later, I cannot forget the
exquisite loveliness of the impression then conveyed. The garden, it is
true, appeared to have been for years untended; weeds half-choked the
gravel paths, and the flower-beds were a congestion of mingled wild and
cultivated vegetations. It was set in a wall of mellowed brick, in which
snap-dragon and stone-crop had found an anchorage to their liking, and
beyond that there stood sentinel a ring of ancient pines in which the
breeze made music as of a distant sea. Outside that the ground sloped
slightly downwards in a bank covered with a jungle of wild-rose to the
stream that ran round three sides of the garden, and then followed a
meandering course through the two big fields which lay towards the
village. Over all this we had fishing-rights; above, the same rights
extended for another quarter of a mile to the arched bridge, over which
there crossed the road which led to the house. In this field above the
house on the fourth side, where the ground had been embanked to carry
the road, stood a brick-kiln in a ruinous state. A shallow pit, long
overgrown with tall grasses and wild field-flowers, showed where the
clay had been digged.

The house itself was long and narrow; entering, you passed direct into a
square panelled hall, on the left of which was the dining-room which
communicated with the passage leading to the kitchen and offices. On the
right of the hall were two excellent sitting-rooms looking out, the one
on to the gravel in front of the house, the other on to the garden. From
the first of these you could see, through the gap in the pines by which
the road approached the house, the brick-kiln of which I have already
spoken. An oak staircase went up from the hall, and round it ran a
gallery on to which the three principal bedrooms opened. These were
commensurate with the dining-room and the two sitting-rooms below. From
this gallery there led a long narrow passage shut off from the rest of
the house by a red-baize door, which led to a couple more guestrooms and
the servant’s quarters.

Jack Singleton and I share the same flat in town, and we had sent down
in the morning Franklyn and his wife, two old and valued servants, to
get things ready at Trevor Major, and procure help from the village to
look after the house, and Mrs Franklyn with her stout comfortable face
all wreathed in smiles opened the door to us. She had had some previous
experience of the “comfortable quarters” which go with fishing, and had
come down prepared for the worst, but found it all of the best. The
kitchen-boiler was not furred; hot and cold water were laid on in the
most convenient fashion, and could be obtained from taps that neither
stuck nor leaked. Her husband, it appeared, had gone into the village to
buy a few necessaries, and she brought up tea for us, and then went
upstairs to the two rooms over the dining-room and bigger sitting-room,
which we had chosen for our bedrooms, to unpack. The doors of these were
exactly opposite one another to right and left of the gallery, and Jack
who chose the bedroom above the sitting-room had thus a smaller room,
above the second sitting-room, unoccupied, next his and opening out from
it.

We had a couple of hours’ fishing before dinner, each of us catching
three or four brace of trout, and came back in the dusk to the house.
Franklyn had returned from the village from his errand, reported that he
had got a woman to come in to do housework in the mornings, and
mentioned that our arrival had seemed to arouse a good deal of interest.
The reason for this was obscure; he could only tell us that he was
questioned a dozen times as to whether we really intended to live in the
house, and his assurance that we did produced silence and a shaking of
heads. But the country-folk of Sussex are notable for their silence and
chronic attitude of disapproval, and we put this down to local
idiosyncrasy.

The evening was exquisitely warm, and after dinner we pulled out a
couple of basket-chairs on to the gravel by the front door, and sat for
an hour or so, while the night deepened in throbs of gathering darkness.
The moon was not risen and the ring of pines cut off much of the pale
starlight, so that when we went in, allured by the shining of the lamp
in the sitting-room, it was curiously dark for a clear night in May. And
at that moment of stepping from the darkness into the cheerfulness of
the lighted house, I had a sudden sensation, to which, during the next
fortnight, I became almost accustomed, of there being something unseen
and unheard and dreadful near me. In spite of the warmth, I felt myself
shiver, and concluded instantly that I had sat out-of-doors long enough,
and without mentioning it to Jack, followed him into the smaller
sitting-room in which we had scarcely yet set foot. It like the hall was
oak-panelled, and in the panels hung some half-dozen of water-colour
sketches, which we examined, idly at first, and then with growing
interest, for they were executed with extraordinary finish and delicacy,
and each represented some aspect of the house or garden. Here you looked
up the gap in the fir-trees into a crimson sunset; here the garden, trim
and carefully tended, dozed beneath some languid summer noon; here an
angry wreath of storm-cloud brooded over the meadow where the
trout-stream ran grey and leaden below a threatening sky, while another,
the most careful and arresting of all, was a study of the brick-kiln. In
this, alone of them all, was there a human figure; a man, dressed in
grey, peered into the open door from which issued a fierce red glow. The
figure was painted with miniature-like elaboration; the face was in
profile, and represented a youngish man, clean-shaven with a long
aquiline nose and singularly square chin. The sketch was long and narrow
in shape, and the chimney of the kiln appeared against a dark sky. From
it there issued a thin streamer of grey smoke.

Jack looked at this with attention.

“What a horrible picture,” he said, “and how beautifully painted. I feel
as if it meant something, as if it was a representation of something
that happened, not a mere sketch. By Jove!----”

He broke off suddenly, and went in turn to each of the other pictures.

“That’s a queer thing,” he said. “See if you notice what I mean.”

With the brick-kiln rather vividly impressed on my mind, it was not
difficult to see what he had noticed. In each of the pictures appeared
the brick-kiln, chimney and all, now seen faintly between trees, now in
full view, and in each the chimney was smoking.

“And the odd part is that from the garden side, you can’t really see the
kiln at all,” observed Jack, “it’s hidden by the house, and yet the
artist F. A., as I see by his signature, puts it in just the same.”

“What do you make of that?” I asked.

“Nothing. I suppose he had a fancy for brick-kilns. Let’s have a game of
picquet.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A fortnight of our three weeks passed without incident, except that
again and again the curious feeling of something dreadful being close at
hand was present in my mind. In a way, as I said, I got used to it, but
on the other hand the feeling itself seemed to gain in poignancy. Once
just at the end of the fortnight I mentioned it to Jack.

“Odd you should speak of it,” he said, “because I’ve felt the same. When
do you feel it? Do you feel it now for instance?”

We were again sitting out after dinner, and as he spoke I felt it with
far greater intensity than ever before. And at the same moment the
house-door which had been closed, though probably not latched, swung
gently open, letting out a shaft of light from the hall, and as gently
swung to again, as if something had stealthily entered.

“Yes,” I said. “I felt it then. I only feel it in the evening. It was
rather bad that time.”

Jack was silent a moment.

“Funny thing the door opening and shutting like that,” he said. “Let’s
go indoors.”

We got up and I remember seeing at that moment that the windows of my
bedroom were lit; Mrs Franklyn probably was making things ready for the
night. Simultaneously, as we crossed the gravel, there came from just
inside the house the sound of a hurried footstep on the stairs, and
entering we found Mrs Franklyn in the hall, looking rather white and
startled.

“Anything wrong?” I asked.

She took two or three quick breaths before she answered:

“No, sir,” she said, “at least nothing that I can give an account of. I
was tidying up in your room, and I thought you came in. But there was
nobody, and it gave me a turn. I left my candle there; I must go up for
it.”

I waited in the hall a moment, while she again ascended the stairs, and
passed along the gallery to my room. At the door, which I could see was
open, she paused, not entering.

“What is the matter?” I asked from below.

“I left the candle alight,” she said, “and it’s gone out.”

Jack laughed.

“And you left the door and window open,” said he.

“Yes, sir, but not a breath of wind is stirring,” said Mrs Franklyn,
rather faintly.

This was true, and yet a few moments ago the heavy hall-door had swung
open and back again. Jack ran upstairs.

“We’ll brave the dark together, Mrs Franklyn,” he said.

He went into my room, and I heard the sound of a match struck. Then
through the open door came the light of the rekindled candle and
simultaneously I heard a bell ring in the servant’s quarters. In a
moment came steps, and Franklyn appeared.

“What bell was that?” I asked.

“Mr Jack’s bedroom, sir,” he said.

I felt there was a marked atmosphere of nerves about for which there was
really no adequate cause. All that had happened of a disturbing nature
was that Mrs Franklyn had thought I had come into my bedroom, and had
been startled by finding I had not. She had then left the candle in a
draught, and it had been blown out. As for a bell ringing, that, even if
it had happened, was a very innocuous proceeding.

“Mouse on a wire,” I said. “Mr Jack is in my room this moment lighting
Mrs Franklyn’s candle for her.”

Jack came down at this juncture, and we went into the sitting-room. But
Franklyn apparently was not satisfied, for we heard him in the room
above us, which was Jack’s bedroom, moving about with his slow and
rather ponderous tread. Then his steps seemed to pass into the bedroom
adjoining, and we heard no more.

I remember feeling hugely sleepy that night, and went to bed earlier
than usual, to pass rather a broken night with stretches of dreamless
sleep interspersed with startled awakenings, in which I passed very
suddenly into complete consciousness. Sometimes the house was absolutely
still, and the only sound to be heard was the sighing of the night
breeze outside in the pines, but sometimes the place seemed full of
muffled movements, and once I could have sworn that the handle of my
door turned. That required verification, and I lit my candle, but found
that my ears must have played me false. Yet even as I stood there, I
thought I heard steps just outside, and with a considerable qualm, I
must confess, I opened the door and looked out. But the gallery was
quite empty, and the house quite still. Then from Jack’s room opposite I
heard a sound that was somehow comforting, the snorts of the snorer, and
I went back to bed and slept again, and when next I woke, morning was
already breaking in red lines on the horizon, and the sense of trouble
that had been with me ever since last evening had gone.

Heavy rain set in after lunch next day, and as I had arrears of
letter-writing to do, and the water was soon both muddy and rising, I
came home alone about five, leaving Jack still sanguine by the stream,
and worked for a couple of hours sitting at a writing-table in the room
overlooking the gravel at the front of the house, where hung the
water-colours. By seven I had finished, and just as I got up to light
candles, since it was already dusk, I saw, as I thought, Jack’s figure
emerge from the bushes that bordered the path to the stream, on to the
space in front of the house. Then instantaneously and with a sudden
queer sinking of the heart, quite unaccountable, I saw that it was not
Jack at all, but a stranger. He was only some six yards from the window,
and after pausing there a moment he came close up to the window, so that
his face nearly touched the glass, looking intently at me. In the light
from the freshly-kindled candles I could distinguish his features with
great clearness, but though, as far as I knew, I had never seen him
before, there was something familiar about both his face and figure. He
appeared to smile at me, but the smile was one of inscrutable evil and
malevolence, and immediately he walked on, straight towards the
house-door opposite him, and out of sight of the sitting-room window.

Now, little though I liked the look of the man, he was, as I have said,
familiar to my eye, and I went out into the hall, since he was clearly
coming to the front-door, to open it to him and learn his business. So
without waiting for him to ring, I opened it, feeling sure I should find
him on the step. Instead, I looked out into the empty gravel-sweep, the
heavy-falling rain, the thick dusk. And even as I looked, I felt
something that I could not see push by me through the half-opened door
and pass into the house. Then the stairs creaked, and a moment after a
bell rang.

Franklyn is the quickest man to answer a bell I have ever seen, and next
instant he passed me going upstairs. He tapped at Jack’s door, entered,
and then came down again.

“Mr Jack still out, sir?” he asked.

“Yes. His bell ringing again?”

“Yes, sir,” said Franklyn, quite imperturbably.

I went back into the sitting-room, and soon Franklyn brought a lamp. He
put it on the table above which hung the careful and curious picture of
the brick-kiln, and then with a sudden horror I saw why the stranger on
the gravel outside had been so familiar to me. In all respects he
resembled the figure that peered into the kiln; it was more than a
resemblance, it was an identity. And what had happened to this man who
had inscrutably and evilly smiled at me? And what had pushed in through
the half-closed door?

At that moment I saw the face of Fear; my mouth went dry, and I heard my
heart leaping and cracking in my throat. That face was only turned on me
for a moment, and then away again, but I knew it to be the genuine
thing; not apprehension, not foreboding, not a feeling of being
startled, but Fear, cold Fear. And then though nothing had occurred to
assuage the Fear, it passed, and a certain sort of reason usurped--for
so I must say--its place. I had certainly seen somebody on the gravel
outside the house; I had supposed he was going to the front-door. I had
opened it, and found he had not come to the front-door. Or--and once
again the terror resurged--had the invisible pushing thing been that
which I had seen outside? And if so, what was it? And how came it that
the face and figure of the man I had seen was the same as that which was
so scrupulously painted in the picture of the brick-kiln?

I set myself to argue down the Fear for which there was no more
foundation than this, this and the repetition of the ringing bell, and
my belief is that I did so. I told myself, till I believed it, that a
man--a human man--had been walking across the gravel outside, and that
he had not come to the front-door but had gone, as he might easily have
done, up the drive into the high-road. I told myself that it was mere
fancy that was the cause of the belief that Something had pushed in by
me, and as for the ringing of the bell, I said to myself, as was true,
that this had happened before. And I must ask the reader to believe also
that I argued these things away, and looked no longer on the face of
Fear itself. I was not comfortable, but I fell short of being terrified.

I sat down again by the window looking on to the gravel in front of the
house, and finding another letter that asked, though it did not demand
an answer, proceeded to occupy myself with it. Straight in front led the
drive through the gap in the pines, and passed through the field where
lay the brick-kiln. In a pause of page-turning I looked up and saw
something unusual about it; at the same moment an unusual smell came to
my nostril. What I saw was smoke coming out of the chimney of the kiln,
what I smelt was the odour of roasting meat. The wind--such as there
was--set from the kiln to the house. But as far as I knew the smell of
roast meat probably came from the kitchen where dinner, so I supposed,
was cooking. I had to tell myself this: I wanted reassurance, lest the
face of Fear should look whitely on me again.

Then there came a crisp step on the gravel, a rattle at the front-door,
and Jack came in.

“Good sport,” he said, “you gave up too soon.”

And he went straight to the table above which hung the picture of the
man at the brick-kiln, and looked at it. Then there was silence; and
eventually I spoke, for I wanted to know one thing.

“Seen anybody?” I asked.

“Yes. Why do you ask?”

“Because I have also; the man in that picture.”

Jack came and sat down near me.

“It’s a ghost, you know,” he said. “He came down to the river about dusk
and stood near me for an hour. At first I thought he was--was real, and
I warned him that he had better stand further off if he didn’t want to
be hooked. And then it struck me he wasn’t real, and I cast, well, right
through him, and about seven he walked up towards the house.”

“Were you frightened?”

“No. It was so tremendously interesting. So you saw him here too.
Whereabouts?”

“Just outside. I think he is in the house now.”

Jack looked round.

“Did you see him come in?” he asked.

“No, but I felt him. There’s another queer thing too; the chimney of the
brick-kiln is smoking.”

Jack looked out of the window. It was nearly dark but the wreathing
smoke could just be seen.

“So it is,” he said, “fat, greasy smoke. I think I’ll go up and see
what’s on. Come too?”

“I think not,” I said.

“Are you frightened? It isn’t worth while. Besides, it is so
tremendously interesting.”

Jack came back from his little expedition still interested. He had found
nothing stirring at the kiln, but though it was then nearly dark the
interior was faintly luminous, and against the black of the sky he could
see a wisp of thick white smoke floating northwards. But for the rest of
the evening we neither heard nor saw anything of abnormal import, and
the next day ran a course of undisturbed hours. Then suddenly a hellish
activity was manifested.

That night, while I was undressing for bed, I heard a bell ring
furiously, and I thought I heard a shout also. I guessed where the ring
came from, since Franklyn and his wife had long ago gone to bed, and
went straight to Jack’s room. But as I tapped at the door I heard his
voice from inside calling loud to me. “Take care,” it said, “he’s close
to the door.”

A sudden qualm of blank fear took hold of me, but mastering it as best I
could, I opened the door to enter, and once again something pushed
softly by me, though I saw nothing.

Jack was standing by his bed, half-undressed. I saw him wipe his
forehead with the back of his hand.

“He’s been here again,” he said. “I was standing just here, a minute
ago, when I found him close by me. He came out of the inner room, I
think. Did you see what he had in his hand?”

“I saw nothing.”

“It was a knife; a great long carving knife. Do you mind my sleeping on
the sofa in your room to-night? I got an awful turn then. There was
another thing too. All round the edge of his clothes, at his collar and
at his wrists, there were little flames playing, little white licking
flames.”

       *       *       *       *       *

But next day, again, we neither heard nor saw anything, nor that night
did the sense of that dreadful presence in the house come to us. And
then came the last day. We had been out till it was dark, and as I said,
had a wonderful day among the fish. On reaching home we sat together in
the sitting-room, when suddenly from overhead came a tread of feet, a
violent pealing of the bell, and the moment after yell after yell as of
someone in mortal agony. The thought occurred to both of us that this
might be Mrs Franklyn in terror of some fearful sight, and together we
rushed up and sprang into Jack’s bedroom.

The doorway into the room beyond was open, and just inside it we saw the
man bending over some dark huddled object. Though the room was dark we
could see him perfectly, for a light stale and impure seemed to come
from him. He had again a long knife in his hand, and as we entered he
was wiping it on the mass that lay at his feet. Then he took it up, and
we saw what it was, a woman with head nearly severed. But it was not Mrs
Franklyn.

And then the whole thing vanished, and we were standing looking into a
dark and empty room. We went downstairs without a word, and it was not
till we were both in the sitting-room below that Jack spoke.

“And he takes her to the brick-kiln,” he said rather unsteadily. “I say,
have you had enough of this house? I have. There is hell in it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

About a week later Jack put into my hand a guidebook to Sussex open at
the description of Trevor Major, and I read:

“Just outside the village stands the picturesque manor house, once the
home of the artist and notorious murderer, Francis Adam. It was here he
killed his wife, in a fit, it is believed, of groundless jealousy,
cutting her throat and disposing of her remains by burning them in a
brick-kiln. Certain charred fragments found six months afterwards led to
his arrest and execution.”

       *       *       *       *       *

So I prefer to leave the house with the brick-kiln and the pictures
signed F. A. to others.


TURNBULL AND SPEARS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH

OBSERVER.--“_Miss Stevens has really leaped to the front rank among
writers of fiction._”


THE LURE

BY

E. S. STEVENS

Author of “The Veil” and “The Mountain of God,” etc.

_Crown 8vo_, =6s.=


The lure of adventure, the lure of a strong and unscrupulous
personality, and the lure of the Dark Continent, play their parts in
this story. Anne, the woman of the book, comes under the influence of
all three, to learn at the last that they have only enchained her
imagination and not her heart. A great part of this notable novel takes
place in the less known parts of the Soudan, where the main actors in
the drama meet and work out their destinies. The background is that vast
land of the elephant, the crocodile, and the hippopotamus, where
solitary Englishmen are loyally serving their country and civilisation,
without vainglory or hope of reward. THE LURE will be one of the most
remarkable novels of 1912.


_Novels by E. S. Stevens_

THE VEIL. 6_s._ (Cloth.)
   Do.    1_s._ (Paper.)

THE MOUNTAIN OF GOD. 6_s._ (Cloth.)
       Do.           1_s._ (Paper.)

THE EARTHEN DRUM. 6_s._ (Eastern Stories.)

_Make the acquaintance of E. S. Stevens immediately_


MILLS & BOON, LTD., 49 RUPERT ST., LONDON, W.




_A Remarkable Indian Romance_

THE DAUGHTER OF BRAHMA

By I. A. R. WYLIE

Author of “The Rajah’s People” and “Dividing Waters”

_Crown 8vo_, =6s.=


In THE DAUGHTER OF BRAHMA we are transported back to the mysterious
atmosphere and brilliant Oriental colourings which marked the author’s
first novel, “The Rajah’s People.” But here the complications of race
and religion in India are faced from another standpoint--that of the
woman. With profound sympathy we follow the wonderful moral and
spiritual growth of the daughter of Brahma, whose fate becomes so
strangely linked with that of the hero. With an equal interest,
moreover, the reader is led step by step through an absorbing plot, in
which all the hidden religious and political life of India is revealed
in striking colours, until the final crisis is reached. The crisis,
indeed, is an intensely dramatic and tragic one; but it satisfies not
only by its truth, but by the promise of future happiness which it
brings with it. The story draws into it many minor characters, who, like
the two chief figures, win both interest and sympathy by their
originality and life-like portraiture.

     _Mills & Boon confidently recommend THE DAUGHTER OF BRAHMA as one
     of the finest novels of 1912._


MILLS & BOON, LTD., 49 RUPERT ST., LONDON, W.




_A Notable Novel_

Some years ago there appeared a very notable novel which Mills & Boon
believe has got lost sight of in the rush of Fiction so energetically
published by almost every firm. It was entitled--


AN ENGLISHMAN

By MARY PENDERED

How many readers of to-day remember it? Mills & Boon will shortly issue
a new and revised edition at =6s.=, and they hope the public will not miss
this chance of reading one of the finest novels of the last fifteen
years. Some reviews are here given which appeared when the book was
originally published.

     “We have nothing but admiration for this very noble book. It is by
     far the most important the season has yet produced. It is filled
     with wisdom and sympathy, and in the Englishman of the title the
     author has created a _man_.”--_Literary World._

            *       *       *       *       *

     “As thoroughly English as ‘Middlemarch’ or ‘Cranford.’”--_Sunday
     Times._

            *       *       *       *       *

     “A thoroughly wholesome, sympathetic, effective story, the interest
     of which is sustained with unbroken continuity from its opening to
     its close.... Handled with remarkable adroitness, and manifesting
     no inconsiderable originality of characterisation.

     “Miss Pendered’s ‘Englishman’ possesses that width of observation
     and simplicity of purpose which lift it far above the
     average.”--_Daily Telegraph._


(W. L. Courtney in his summary of the best book of the year 1899.)


MILLS & BOON, Ltd., 49 Rupert Street, London, W.




MILLS & BOON

have just published two of the brightest novels issued recently. All
fiction readers should get =MAUDE ANNESLEY’S=

ALL AWRY

which is a story of delicious adventure. (Second edition.) =6/-=


Please read what the Critics say:

     _T.P.’s Weekly._--“So vivid and entertaining that we read on and on
     as if there had never been a ‘Robinson Crusoe.’ In ‘All Awry’ Miss
     Annesley has certainly put the best work she has yet done.... I
     expect ‘All Awry’ to be one of the most widely read books of the
     year.”

     _Observer._--“By far the best story Miss Annesley has given us.”

     _Globe._--“Miss Annesley has written nothing better than ‘All
     Awry.’”


Another delightful novel just issued is =EDGAR JEPSON’S=

POLLYOOLY

the most delightful gift book of the year for young and old. (Second
edition.) =6/-=

     _Pall Mall Gazette._--“An original creation. ‘Pollyooly’ never lets
     us be dull for a moment, and provides us with the liveliest
     entertainment. Mr. Jepson is to be congratulated on a new triumph.”

     _Daily Express._--“The jolliest little heroine imaginable....
     ‘Pollyooly’ is a veritable panacea for the hump.”

     _Sheffield Telegraph._--“A very delightful child study. The chief
     charm of the book is its laughter, light hearted, gay, and
     continuing to the last page of the last chapter.”

     _Daily Mail._--“Delightful reading from cover to cover. Brimful of
     genuine humour, which is never forced and therefore never palls.”

=ALL AWRY= and =POLLYOOLY= can be read by fathers, mothers, sons and
daughters. They are the two jolliest novels published this year.


There is always a New MILLS & BOON NOVEL--Here is a NOVEL MILLS & BOON
IDEA

THE GOLFER’S POCKET TIP BOOK

Pocket size, leather, =5/-= net. (Second edition.)

     By G. D. FOX (Part Author of “The 6 H’cap Golfer’s Companion, as.
     6d. net”). Containing the Revised Rules of Golf, a Chapter on
     Putting by, and 34 Illustrations of, Jack White, Chart of Stroke
     Allowances, &c.

=Harry Vardon says=:--“It is a very handy little book.”

     “Concise, clear, crisp, brief and business-like, worth as a teacher
     half-a-dozen ordinary books.”--_Morning Post._

     “The text-book _de luxe_.”--_World of Golf._

     “_The golfer has certain human qualities, delighting in receiving
     presents._

     _And I have found the very thing!_

     _It is called ‘The Golfer’s Pocket Tip Book.’_”--_Manchester Daily
     Dispatch._

     “One of the very best golfing volumes yet published.”--_Sporting
     Life._

Uniform with this Volume is =THE MOTORIST’S POCKET TIP BOOK=. By Geoffrey
Osborn. =5/-= net. At all Booksellers.


MILLS & BOON, Ltd., 49 Rupert Street, London, W.




MY GERMAN YEAR

By I. A. R. WYLIE

AUTHOR OF “IN DIFFERENT KEYS,” “DIVIDING WATERS,” “THE RAJAH’S PEOPLE,”
ETC.

With 2 Illustrations in colour, and 18 from Photographs
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. =10s. 6d.= net

The _Westminster Gazette_ has reviewed “My German Year” as “a vivid,
attractive, and really informing volume,” and also as “wise,
well-informed, and very readable, with some delightful fresh information
and shrewd criticisms.” Also saying: “We close ‘My German Year’ with a
feeling of gratitude for very good entertainment all through, and with a
sense that though on a good many minor points the writer is led by her
enthusiasm to see matters in a far too roseate light, she has used her
brain and her eyes to good purpose during her ‘German Year,’ and has
written a book which suffers in no way by the fact that the last few
years have seen the publication in this country of several volumes on
the same subject.”

The _Evening Standard_ (also a lengthy notice) said: “We have seldom
read a more interesting book than ‘My German Year.’ Miss Wylie’s words
are often bitter to the taste, still more bitter very often is what she
leaves unsaid, the obvious inferences she hands on to us to draw, but it
is all extremely salutary, and should be read by every householder in
the land.”


MY ITALIAN YEAR

By RICHARD BAGOT

AUTHOR OF “CASTING OF NETS,” “A ROMAN MYSTERY,” “DONNA DIANA” “THE LAKES
OF NORTHERN ITALY,” “THE HOUSE OF SERRAVALLE,” ETC.

With 25 Illustrations
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. =10s. 6d.= net

_Daily Mail._--“It is this new Italy--the country of the future and not
of the past--which forms the subject of Mr Bagot’s absorbingly
interesting pages. Twenty years’ residence in the country and a sound
knowledge of its language have enabled Mr Bagot to penetrate deeply into
the character not only of the Italian in general, but of the numerous
races that form the Italian nation; to form a just estimate of Italian
institutions, politics, social life, customs, and aspirations. He does
this with absolute impartiality, distributing praise and blame from the
vantage-point of his exceptional experience. For Mr Bagot appears to
have explored every corner of the country, and to have associated with
every class of its population.”

_Daily Telegraph._--“It is a thoughtful, knowledgeful book that Mr Bagot
has given us, and one that intending visitors to Italy will do well to
read and ponder over.”

_Daily Graphic._--“Mr Bagot’s book is a highly interesting and
sympathetic description of Italian life in all its phases.”


           MILLS & BOON, Ltd., 49 Rupert Street, London, W.




                            MILLS & BOON’S

                            SHILLING NOVELS

  =THE MOUNTAIN OF GOD.= By E. S. STEVENS.
  =THE VEIL.= By E. S. STEVENS.
  =THE RAJAH’S PEOPLE.= By I. A. R. WYLIE.
  =DOWN OUR STREET.= By J. E. BUCKROSE.
  =THE PEER’S PROGRESS.= By J. STORER CLOUSTON.
  =THE PRODIGAL FATHER.= By J. STORER CLOUSTON.
  =TALES OF KING FIDO.= By J. STORER CLOUSTON.
  =THE LOVE STORY OF A MORMON.= By WINIFRED GRAHAM.
  =THE ENEMY OF WOMAN.= By WINIFRED GRAHAM.
  =MARY.= By WINIFRED GRAHAM.
  =THE SINS OF THE CHILDREN.= By HORACE W. C. NEWTE.
  =CALICO JACK=: A Story of the Music Halls. By HORACE W. C. NEWTE.
  =THE LONELY LOVERS.= By HORACE W. C. NEWTE.
  =SPARROWS.= The Story of an Unprotected Girl. By HORACE W. C. NEWTE.
  =CARDILLAC.= By ROBERT BARR.
  =813= (A new Arsène Lupin Adventure). By MAURICE LEBLANC.
  =MARY UP AT GAFFRIES.= By S. C. NETHERSOLE.
  =THE WOMAN WHO FORGOT.= By LADY TROUBRIDGE.
  =CUMNER’S SON.= By GILBERT PARKER.
  *=THE BILL-TOPPERS.= By ANDRÉ CASTAIGNE.
  *=THE QUAKER GIRL.= By HAROLD SIMPSON.
  *=THE COUNT OF LUXEMBOURG.= By HAROLD SIMPSON.
  *=THE DOLLAR PRINCESS.= By HAROLD SIMPSON.
  *=ARSÈNE LUPIN.= By EDGAR JEPSON and MAURICE LEBLANC.
  *=D’ARCY OF THE GUARDS.= By L. E. SHIPMAN.
  =PETER PAN= (The Fairy Story of the Play). By G. D. DRENNAN.
  =BEWARE OF THE DOG.= By Mrs BAILLIE REYNOLDS.
  =FOR CHURCH AND CHIEFTAIN.= By MAY WYNNE.
  =THE ADVENTURES OF CAPTAIN JACK.= By MAX PEMBERTON.
  =THE END AND THE BEGINNING.= By COSMO HAMILTON.
  =WEE MACGREEGOR.= By J. J. B.
  =PROOFS BEFORE PULPING.= By BARRY PAIN.
  =THOMAS HENRY.= By W. PETT RIDGE.

  * Novels of the Plays.


MILLS & BOON, Ltd., 49 Rupert Street, London, W.



Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

greath depth=> great depth {pg 54}

never pentrate=> never penetrate {pg 184}

clear chalk-streami=> clear chalk-streams {pg 331}

minature-like elaboration=> miniature-like elaboration {pg 326}






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROOM IN THE TOWER, AND OTHER STORIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


